

E XAMINING S CALING AND T RANSFER OF L ANGUAGE M ODEL A RCHITECTURES FOR M ACHINE T RANSLA - TION

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT



Natural language understanding and generation models follow one of the two dominant architectural paradigms: language models (LMs) that process concate- nated sequences in a single stack of layers, and encoder-decoder models (EncDec) that utilize separate layer stacks for input and output processing. In machine trans- lation, EncDec has long been the favoured approach

 ,

but with few studies inves- tigating the performance of LMs. In this work, we thoroughly examine the role of several architectural design choices on the performance of LMs on bilingual, (massively) multilingual and zero-shot translation tasks, under systematic vari- ations of data conditions and model sizes. Our results show that: (i) Different LMs have different scaling properties, where architectural differences often have a signiﬁcant impact on model performance at small scales

 ,

but the performance gap narrows as the number of parameters increases, (ii) Several design choices, including causal masking and language-modeling objectives for the source se- quence, have detrimental effects on translation quality, and (iii) When paired with full-visible masking for source sequences, LMs could perform on par with EncDec on supervised bilingual and multilingual translation tasks, but improve greatly on zero-shot directions by facilitating the reduction of off-target translations.



1 I NTRODUCTION

 The popularity of large, general-purpose text generation models has skyrocketed in recent years due to their outstanding performance across a wide range of natural language processing tasks (Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Xue et al., 2021). These generative models come in two ﬂavors: encoder-decoder (EncDec) models (Raffel et al., 2020) with two independent modules for encoding and decoding, and encoder-only (Devlin et al., 2019) or decoder-only models (Brown et al., 2020) that use a single module for both encoding and decoding (LMs). Often, these two types of architectures deliver comparable downstream performance under large-scale pretraining. In neural machine translation (NMT), however, EncDec is the dominant paradigm across all transla- tion tasks (Barrault et al., 2020; Ansari et al., 2020). While some studies reported promising trans- lation quality with LMs (He et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021), they compare models under merely one conﬁguration (model size), neglecting that neural models follow scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Ghorbani et al., 2021; Gordon et al., 2021) where the impact of each added parameter on model per- formance might vary across different models. How the inductive biases of LMs and EncDec differ from each other in translation and how they will impact the model’s performance as we increase their size and the amounts of training data are intriguing yet have not been examined in depth. In this paper, we explore various conﬁgurations of LM architectures for translation as in Figure 1, and compare them with EncDec on model scaling and cross-lingual transfer. We conduct a system- atic study under a variety of data conditions, tasks (bilingual, multilingual and zero-shot) and model capacities. We examine architectural design choices associated with LMs, including causal masking (CausalLM) vs. full-visible masking (PreﬁxLM) for source sequences, 1 layer-wise coordination (He 1 Also known as unidirectional vs bidirectional language modelling, where in the unidirectional case a token representation takes into account only the preceding tokens and their representations, but the bidirectional case takes into account both preceding and following tokens in a sequence. 1 x x 2 x < s > y 1 y 0 1 2 0 1 2 MLE Loss (Y|X Source PrefixLM CasualLM Attention LayerWise Encoding x 1 x 2 x 3 < s > y 1 y 2 x 1 x 2 x y 1 y < s x 1 x 2 x 3 < s > y 1 y x 1 2 et al., 2018) vs. ﬁnal-layer source encodings (TopOnly) for target sequence generation, increasing LM depth vs. width, and also the effect of adding source language modeling loss for CausalLM. We evaluate how these architectural priors affect translation quality as we increase the number of parameters available to the model, under a diverse set of bilingual translation settings and also (mas- sively) multilingual settings, with a special focus on transfer to low-resource languages and zero-shot directions. Our main ﬁndings are summarized below: • LMs show different scaling properties compared to EncDec. The architectural differences become less important as models scale, measured by reduced quality gap against EncDec, regardless of the language similarities, training data conditions and evaluation settings. • PreﬁxLM variants often outperform their CausalLM counterparts; increasing LM depth beneﬁts the translation task more than increasing the width; and adding a source-side lan- guage modeling objective to CausalLM doesn’t affect translation quality. • Cross-lingual transfer also beneﬁts from model scaling, where EncDec almost always dom- inates the quality Pareto frontier on supervised directions while zero-shot translation favors PreﬁxLM LMs. PreﬁxLM LMs signiﬁcantly reduce off-target translations. • Although LMs could reach or even surpass the translation quality of EncDec, they still lag far behind EncDec with respect to computational efﬁciency as measured in FLOPs.

2 R ELATED W ORK

 Using language models in the task of translation has a long history, particularly in the era of statis- tical machine translation (SMT) where LM was used as a separate yet crucial component ensuring the ﬂuency of generation (Stolcke, 2002; Heaﬁeld, 2011; Koehn, 2010). With neural networks, NMT uniﬁed those isolated SMT components including LM under the encoder-decoder formula- tion (Kalchbrenner & Blunsom, 2013; Cho et al., 2014; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015), which makes use of separate modules to process input and output. Further studies exploring architectural modiﬁcations by using LM alone as a translation model, nevertheless, got much less attention. He et al. (2018) proposed layer-wise coordination between encoder and decoder with tied weights, where each decoder layer attends to its corresponding encoder layer at the same depth as opposed to the conventional method of attending the top-most encoder representations. Later, Fonollosa et al. (2019) extended it with locality constraint. Dong et al. (2019) explored LMs for sequence generation under large-scale pretraining. Despite reporting promising results, these prior studies either focus only on bilingual tasks or do not consider the scaling properties of the models, leaving the picture incomplete: how the ﬁndings will change as we scale the models and how the languages beneﬁt from/interfere each other as the architectural priors (inductive biases) change. 2 Neural models follow some scaling laws. Kaplan et al. (2020) reported the test cross-entropy loss of LMs can be formulated as a power-law scaling function of either model size (excluding embed- ding parameters) or dataset size. Later on, researchers examined and conﬁrmed such ﬁndings across different domains, including vision modeling (Zhai et al., 2021), knowledge transfer from pretrain- ing (Hernandez et al., 2021), autoregressive generative modeling (Henighan et al., 2020) and neural machine translation (Gordon et al., 2021; Ghorbani et al., 2021), to name a few. We ﬁnd it essential to study the scaling behavior of new architectures and approaches given the recent evidence on the emergent properties of the models at scale (Brown et al., 2020) Another critical component in machine translation is the number of languages being considered with the models, which is the very focus of multilingual NMT (Firat et al., 2016). Cross-lingual transfer in multilingual NMT often results from parameter sharing across languages, which bene- ﬁts low-resource languages and also enables zero-shot translation (Johnson et al., 2017), although the quality on zero-shot directions is largely hindered by the off-target translation problem (Ari- vazhagan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2020). The structure of LMs further encourages parameter sharing, offering a chance to improve the transfer while magnifying the problem of interference (negative-transfer) (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). Very recently, Wang et al. (2021) an- alyzed the cross-lingual transfer behavior of CausalLM, and reported encouraging zero-shot per- formance. However, we did not observe the same results likely because of data sampling, model architecture and optimization differences which zero-shot transfer is sensitive to.

3 L ANGUAGE M ODEL A RCHITECTURES FOR T RANSLATION

 In this section, we brieﬂy review EncDec and then present LM architectures for translation based on Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). Table 1 compares different models. Given a source sequence X of length | X | and its target translation Y of length | Y | , EncDec performs translation via the following structure: where l denotes the layer index and ◦ indicates consecutive sublayers. Y l ∈ R | Y |× d are the layer representations of the source and target sequence respectively, with a model dimension of d . The ﬁrst input layer ( X 0 , Y 0 ) is the summation of token embeddings and their positional encodings. We drop all the layer normalization and residual connections in our formulations for brevity. The encoder is a stack of L layers, each of which includes a multi-head self-attention sublayer (SAtt) followed by a feed-forward sublayer (FFN). SAtt in the encoder is bidirectional with full- visible masking that has full visibility to all source tokens, preceding and following. Its ﬁnal-layer representations X L are fed to the decoder, which shares a similar structure to the encoder but with an additional (multi-head) cross-attention sublayer (CAtt). Unlike encoder, SAtt in the decoder is unidirectional with causal masking , where attention to following tokens is disabled (masked). CAtt can always access all source inputs, though. Note we set the encoder and decoder depth equally to L , and use d ff to denote the intermediate dimension of FFN. EncDec is often optimized with the target translation objective based on Y L : 2) 3 Rather than separately modeling source and target sequences, LM handles both with a single module: ) where M ∈ { 0 , 1 } ( | X | + | Y | ) × ( | X | + | Y | ) is the attention mask that controls the information ﬂow within the concatenated sequences ( [ · , · ] ). 2 Two LM variants explored by changing the structure of mask M , PreﬁxLM and CausalLM . PreﬁxLM merges different modules of EncDec, trained with L TGT . Its attention mask combines the encoder/decoder self-attention mask and the cross-attention mask of EncDec. CausalLM , by contrast, is a strict LM that applies causal masking to both sequences: Apart from L TGT , CausalLM also includes the source-side language modeling loss for training: To improve our understanding of LMs for translation, we further incorporate two extensions: PreﬁxLM + TopOnly The model deﬁned in Equation 3 performs attention over the source and target sequence within the same layer. In contrast, EncDec always uses the topmost-layer source encodings for translation. We mimic this with TopOnly extension by feeding top- layer encodings, i.e. X L instead of X l − 1 , to each attention sublayer. It operates the same as EncDec but with the parameters of encoder and decoder tied. CausalLM + TgtOnly The inclusion of the source-side objective enriches CausalLM’s learning signal and encourages the model to absorb source language characteristics. However, it requires and occupies part of modeling capacity, which might negatively affect translation. To offset this impact, we add the TgtOnly extension that optimizes CausalLM with the tar- get translation objective L TGTC alone, which also aligns better with EncDec and PreﬁxLM.

4 S ETUP

 Model Setting We use Transformer for experiments. By default, we adopt the base setting, with d = 512 , d ff = 2048 and 8 attention heads. We also work with the Transformer big setting where each hyper-parameter above is doubled. Training and inference details are in Appendix A. Datasets and Evaluation We use WMT14 English-French (En-Fr), WMT14 English-German (En-De), WMT19 English-Chinese (En-Zh) and an in-house web-crawled (Web) En-De dataset for experiments, whose statistics are summarized in Table 2. We also report results on OPUS- 100 (Zhang et al., 2020), a massively multilingual corpus containing 100 languages. All datasets are pre-processed with byte pair encoding (Sennrich et al., 2016, BPE) implemented by Sentence- Piece (Kudo & Richardson, 2018). We set the BPE vocabulary size to 32K by default. We report test log-perplexity score (PPL) for scaling study particularly and also show SacreBLEU (Post, 2018) 3 . 2 Note that, in our implementation we still use separate source and target positions as shown in Figure 1. 3 Signature: BLEU+case.mixed+lang*+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+tok.13a+v.1.5.1 4

5 E XPERIMENTS FOR M ODEL S CALING

 Kaplan et al. (2020) reported the model performance can be described with a power-law, with respect to its parameters, as below: where L ( N ) ﬁts test PPL, and N denotes the number of parameters. N 0 is a constant used for numerical stability which is obtained from 1-layer EncDec model. α, p, L ∞ are ﬁtted parameters, and we mainly analyze the estimated scaling exponent p and the irreducible loss L ∞ for different models. The way of increasing model parameters varies for the same model and also across different models. We perform scaling ﬁrstly for EncDec by changing the depth L (from 1 to 26 layers, equally for its encoder and decoder) while keeping the other hyper-parameters intact following Ghorbani et al. (2021). We then align the scaling settings of LM with its EncDec counterpart in term of model parameters through increasing either its depth or width: • LM + Deep adds parameters via stacking more Transformer layers, which was also used in previous studies (He et al., 2018 ; Wang et al. , 2021 ). • LM + Wide , instead, grows the model width. We choose to enlarge the feed-forward di- mension from d ff to 3 d ff . Note other strategies for width scaling are possible and many, but exploring them is resource-consuming and beyond the scope of our paper. We distinguish data-limited regime from model size-limited regime for model scaling (Bahri et al., 2021), where the former has relatively fewer training samples than model parameters thus likely suffers from overﬁtting (e.g. with WMT14 En-Fr and WMT19 En-Zh), while the latter has enough samples for model ﬁtting (e.g. with Web En-De). 5

5.1 S CALING IN D ATA -L IMITED R EGIME

 Architectural difference matters most when the model is at a small scale. Figure 2 summa- rizes the scaling results on WMT14 En-Fr and WMT19 En-Zh. When there are fewer parameters, the model with inductive biases favoring translation will achieve better quality. Such inductive bias includes 1) allowing the full visibility to the source input as in PreﬁxLM 4 rather than causal masking; 2) using topmost-layer source encodings for translation ( TopOnly ) rather than layer-wise coordinated encodings; 3) deeper LMs ( Deep ) rather than wider; and 4) training LMs without source-side lan- guage modeling loss ( TgtOnly ). The fact that LM + Deep outperforms LM + Wide shows that not only the number of parameters matters, but also the way parameters are added. This aligns with the previous ﬁndings: deeper models apply more non-linear operations and induce more abstract repre- sentations, which often helps translation (Wang et al., 2019). This also applies to TopOnly. Most of these ﬁndings are consistent across different languages and evaluation metrics (Figure 2a-2d). Different models show different scaling properties, but the gap narrows at scale. The impact of added parameters on translation performance differs across different models. The LMs perform- ing poorly at small scale often gain more from the increased capacity. For instance, the difference between LM + Deep and LM + Wide almost disappears at the end, resonating with the optimal depth-vs.-width theory (Levine et al., 2020). We observe that PreﬁxLM and EncDec converge to a similar region, followed by CausalLM + TgtOnly while CausalLM still retains a clear gap against the others. This performance gap on WMT19 En-Zh is smaller, mainly because of model overﬁtting. BLEU scores in Figure 2c and 2d also show such a trend, although the relationship between BLEU and PPL is non-trivial (Ghorbani et al., 2021). These tell us that the success of architectural modiﬁ- cations on small-scale models might not transfer to large-scale settings, and that comparing different models under one model conﬁguration might result in incomplete and misleading conclusions. Note we also observe reduced gap when considering the number of layers (see Figure 9 in the Appendix). Do sentence length and originality of test samples affect scaling properties? Not much! We further test how the scaling changes across different evaluation settings, and show the results on WMT14 En-Fr in Figure 3. The scaling exponent changes marginally over different settings (often less than 0.05), suggesting that the scaling curves are quite similar in these settings (see Figure 8, 10, 11 in Appendix), although sentences of different originalities differ largely in style and natural- ness (Graham et al., 2020; Freitag et al., 2020). The estimated irreducible loss shows that target- original parallel sentences are harder to model than the source-original ones, and that translating medium-length sentences is much easier. The loss ranking of different models changes little over these settings, supporting PreﬁxLM and EncDec generally more than CausalLM. Do LMs deal with computational efﬁciency better than EncDec? No! The FLOPs results in Figure 4 show that EncDec demands generally less computation than LM, but the gap narrows at scale. Note LM doesn’t save computations. By contrast, to perform similarly to EncDec, LM often goes wider or deeper, which even deteriorates its running (training and decoding) efﬁciency. 4 By default, we use PreﬁxLM (CausalLM) to refer to all PreﬁxLM variants (CausalLM variants). We adopt the italic form to denote a speciﬁc variant. 6 Besides, EncDec allows arbitrary decoders, e.g. shallow decoders for faster inference, which is non- feasible for LMs. Figure 4 also shows that adding the source-side loss hurts CausalLM’s efﬁciency.

5.2 S CALING IN M ODEL S IZE -L IMITED R EGIME

 Figure 5 shows the in-domain scaling performance on Web En-De. Overall, we observe similar scaling patterns as discovered above, and such pattern transfers to out-of-domain evaluation, FLOPs and BLEU scores. More results are available in the Appendix (Figure 12, 13 and 14).

6 E XPERIMENTS FOR C ROSS -L INGUAL T RANSFER

 Based on the literature (Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021), sharing capacity across languages could encourage knowledge transfer but might also gain the risk of negative interference. In this section, we further compare different models but on multilingual many-to-many translation. To en- able multilingual NMT, we append a target language tag to each source sentence following Johnson et al. (2017). We perform over-sampling to balance the training data with a temperature of T = 5 . Do LMs facilitate the transfer to low-resource languages? Not really! We start with multilin- gual translation for WMT En-De/Fr/Zh, and regard En-De as a relatively low-resource language pair. One reason behind the popularity of multilingual NMT is its transfer capability to low-resource lan- guages. We analyze this transfer behavior for LMs and explore transfer (to De) from similar (Fr) and distant (Zh) languages separately. Figure 6 shows the results. PreﬁxLM produces comparable results to EncDec, while CausalLM lags far behind, and the incorporation of source-side objective actually hurts translation. Overall, we observe that EncDec almost dominates the transfer performance un- der different model sizes, regardless of language similarity. Similar results are also observed for low-resource to high-resource transfer (see Figure 15 in the Appendix). Do LMs beneﬁt zero-shot transfer? PreﬁxLM does! We further test how LMs perform on zero- shot translation. We use the newstest2019 De-Fr test set as the in-domain zero-shot eval set, and an internal sports-domain N-way test set for De-Fr-Zh (2000 samples) as the out-of-domain eval 7 l t i o n L a n g u a g r a c y set. Figure 7 shows the results. Scaling improves knowledge transfer for almost all models, while PreﬁxLM performs surprisingly well on zero-shot directions. In most settings, PreﬁxLM surpasses EncDec signiﬁcantly with respect to BLEU, and such superiority is more obvious on out-of-domain evaluation and for distant language pairs. Nevertheless, we ﬁnd that PreﬁxLM usually underperforms EncDec in terms of PPL. In other words, EncDec still possesses the best ﬁtting ability on zero-shot language pairs. Results on translation language accuracy explains this mismatch: compared to EncDec, PreﬁxLM drastically reduces off- target translation – a bottleneck of zero-shot translation (Zhang et al., 2020). This also suggests that 8 EncDec suffers from more serious searching errors during inference (Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019), In addition, we observe no beneﬁts from CausalLM on zero-shot translation, with or without the source-side language modeling objective. This ﬁnding disagrees with that of Wang et al. (2021), which we ascribe to various differences in model, data and optimization. Note that Wang et al. (2021) adopted more aggressive data oversampling, didn’t consider distant languages, proposed dedicated optimization with the source-side loss, used a different way to count model parameters, and designed different language tags for multilingual translation that could greatly affect zero-shot results (Wu et al., 2021). We leave the study of these differences to the future. How do LMs perform on massively multilingual translation? We further examine the scala- bility of LMs with respect to the number of languages, and experiment on massively multilingual translation using OPUS-100. We enlarge the BPE size to 64K to handle multilingual lexicons. Fol- lowing Zhang et al. (2020), we divide the test language pairs into high-resource (High, > 0.9M), low-resource (Low, < 0.1M), and medium-resource (Med, others) groups, and report average scores for each group. Table 3 summarizes the results. EncDec outperforms LMs on supervised direc- tions, with larger gap on low-resource languages and for XX → En translation. By contrast, LMs, particularly PreﬁxLM, perform better on zero-shot directions, with improved translation language accuracy. Overall, PreﬁxLM outperforms CausalLM, and also performs comparably to EncDec on supervised directions (often < − 1 BLEU on average), echoing with our above ﬁndings.

7 C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

 In this paper, we revisited language model architectures for machine translation in the perspective of model scaling and cross-lingual transfer. Extensive experiments show that LMs often have dif- ferent scaling properties where the impact of architectural differences gradually reduces as model scales up, and that LMs often deliver better zero-shot transfer than its EncDec counterpart with improved off-target translation although its cross-lingual transfer on supervised directions is subop- timal. PreﬁxLM, the one with full visibility to the source input, shows consistent superiority to its CausalLM counterpart, and performs similarly well to EncDec across different settings especially when paired with deep modeling. These ﬁndings show that while current product offerings for major language pairs or small on-device models should continue using EncDec, LMs can be an effective architecture for giant multilingual models with zero-shot transfer as a primary focus. We notice that LMs underperform EncDec signiﬁcantly on computational efﬁciency. In the future, we will put more efforts on developing more efﬁcient networks for LM scaling. We are also inter- ested in exploring the applicability of translation-optimized LMs to downstream monolingual and cross-lingual tasks. 9

R EFERENCES

 10 id=IKA7MLxsLSu 11 12 . acl-main.148. URL https: www. .org .acl- 148 13

A M ODEL T RAINING AND I NFERENCE

 We update model parameters via Adafactor (Shazeer & Stern, 2018) with label smoothing of value 0.1, and scheduled learning rate of warmup steps 40K. We apply dropout of 0.1 to residuals, feed- forward activations and attentions. We employ the post-norm Transformer by default; for some exceptional cases (often with deep models where training is unstable) we use the pre-norm one instead. Batch size is set to about 128K tokens. We train models for up to 1M steps on different tasks, except Web En-De where 500K steps is used. We average 10 checkpoints for evaluation. For bilingual experiments, these checkpoints are selected according to the dev set performance; for multilingual experiments, we use the last 10 checkpoints. Beam search is used for inference, with a beam size of 8 and length penalty of 0.5

B M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

 our test set according to source sentence length, and then split it into 8 disjoint groups. This shows the results on the longest group. 14 15 16 En → De) as a function of model parameters. Models are trained in the Transformer big setting 17