 N O P ARAMETERS L EFT

B EHIND : S ENSITIVITY

 G UIDED A DAPTIVE L EARNING R ATE FOR T RAINING L ARGE T RANSFORMER M ODELS Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Recent research has shown the existence of signiﬁcant redundancy in deep neural networks. One can prune the redundant parameters without signiﬁcantly sacriﬁcing the generalization performance. However, we question whether the redundant parameters could have contributed more if they were properly optimized. To answer this question,

we

 propose a novel optimization strategy that encourages all parameters to be trained sufﬁciently. Speciﬁcally

, we

 adaptively adjust the learning rate for each parameter according to its sensitivity

,

 a robust gradient-based measure reﬂecting this parameter’s contribution to the model performance

.

 A parameter with low sensitivity is redundant, and we improve its ﬁtting by increasing its learning rate

.

 In contrast

,

 a parameter with high sensitivity is well-trained

,

 and

we regularize

 it by decreasing its learning rate

to

 prevent

further

 overﬁtting

. We conduct extensive experiments on natural language understanding, neural machine translation

 ,

and image classiﬁcation to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed schedule.

 Analysis

shows

 that the proposed schedule indeed reduces the redundancy and improves generalization performance.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Large-scale Transformer models have achieved remarkable success in various ﬁelds. Performance of these models scales with their number of parameters, which can be up to hundreds of millions, e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), DeBERTa (He et al., 2020), GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). Recent research, however, has shown the existence of signiﬁcant redundancy in the Transformer models (Michel et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2020). For example, Sanh et al. (2020) removes around 90% of the parameters, and the models exhibit only a marginal performance drop. The existence of redundancy can hurt the model performance. Re- cent works have demonstrated that the removal of the redundant parameters can lead to better generalization performance, a phe- nomenon observed in both small-scale models (Mozer & Smolensky, 1989; Rasmussen & Ghahramani, 2001; Grünwald & Grunwald, 2007) and large-scale Transformer models (Bartoldson et al., 2019; Voita et al., 2019; Hou et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2021). As illus- trated in Figure 1, with up to 20% of the parameters pruned, the generalization performance boosts up to 1% . As a result, we aim to improve model generalization through re- dundancy elimination. However, the existence of redundancy has long been regarded as inevitable. The common belief is that, in each network, there always exists a set of parameters “born” to be useless (Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Liu et al., 2018). Following this belief, pruning, where redundant parameters are directly zeroed out, becomes one of the most widely adopted solutions to redundancy elimination. However, we ask a critical question here: 1 Are these parameters really redundant, or just insufﬁciently trained by commonly used training strategies? Our question is motivated by empirical observations, which show that training strategies indeed play a role in causing redundancy. For example, different learning rates (Table 1), random seeds and optimizers (Morcos et al., 2019) can produce models with similar performance but different sets of redundant parameters. This suggests that the redundancy of parameters depends on the training strategy: A training strategy often prefers speciﬁc parameters and provides them with sufﬁcient training. In contrast, the other parameters receive insufﬁcient training and become under-ﬁtted. As a result, these parameters become redundant, such that they fail to contribute to the generalization and prevent the model from achieving its ideal performance. Therefore, we hypothesize that with a desirable training strategy, these redundant parameters can receive more sufﬁcient training and become useful ultimately. We verify the hypothesis by proposing a novel training strat- egy, which encourages all parameters to be trained sufﬁciently. Throughout the training process, we simultaneously excite the under-ﬁtted parameters to reduce redundancy and regularize the well-ﬁtted parameters to prevent overﬁtting. More speciﬁcally, we propose an adaptive learning rate sched- ule – SAGE (Sensitivity-guided Adaptive learninG ratE), where each parameter learns at its own pace guided by its sensitivity. Sensitivity originated in model pruning, where it is used to measure the redundancy of the parameters (Molchanov et al., 2016; 2019; Theis et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2019). In pruning literature, parameters with low sensitivity are considered redundant. Since a redundant parameter could be insufﬁciently trained and under-ﬁtted, we promote its training by increasing its learning rate. In contrast, for a parameter with high sensitiv- ity, i.e., it is considered sufﬁciently trained and well-ﬁtted, we slow down its training by decreasing its learning rate to prevent overﬁtting. Moreover, we introduce a local temporal variation of the sensitivity as a second factor to further guide the learning rate. The local temporal variation essentially measures the uncertainty of sensitivity, which mainly comes from two sources: (1) The sensitivity can have large variance due to data sampling. This is because during training, the sensitivity is evaluated using a randomly sampled mini-batch instead of all the training data. (2) The sensitivity of a parameter may not be stable and can vary drastically among iterations, which introduces extra uncertainty. We deﬁne the local temporal variation of a parameter as the absolute difference between its sensitivity and an exponential moving average of its sensitivity from all previous iterations. A large local temporal variation implies high uncertainty in the sensitivity at the current iteration, and therefore it is not yet a reliable indicator of redundancy. Accordingly, we should avoid signiﬁcantly decreasing its learning rate even though its sensitivity at the current iteration might be large. Therefore, we eventually require the overall learning rate schedule for each parameter to be pro- portional to the ratio between the local temporal variation and the sensitivity. This can effectively account for the uncertainty issue in sensitivity. We conduct experiments on a wide range of tasks and models to demonstrate the effectiveness of SAGE. In natural language understanding, the ﬁne-tuning performance of BERT-base (Devlin et al., 2018) and RoBERTa-large (Liu et al., 2019b) improves 1 . 4 and 0 . 6 task-average score on the dev set of the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018), respectively. Furthermore, SAGE improves neural machine translation performance using Transformer-base (Vaswani et al., 2017) on two datasets, suggesting it also beneﬁts training-from-scratch. SAGE also boost the image classiﬁcation accuracy on ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009) with Vision Transformer models (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Furthermore, our experiments demonstrate SAGE is complementary to various types of optimizers, e.g., SGD (Robbins & Monro, 1951), Adam, and Adamax (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Moreover, we observe several favorable proprieties of SAGE. First, it leads to balanced and sufﬁcient training on all parameters and produces a better-generalized model. Second, SAGE is complementary 2 to state-of-the-art training methods. Speciﬁcally, we show that SAGE achieves better performance on GLUE when combined with adversarial regularization (Jiang et al., 2019).

2 P RELIMINARY

 We brieﬂy review the sensitivity of the parameters and adaptive learning rate methods.

2.1 S ENSITIVITY OF THE PARAMETERS

 The sensitivity of a parameter essentially approximates the change in the loss magnitude when this parameter is completely zeroed-out (LeCun et al., 1990; Mozer & Smolensky, 1989). If the removal of a parameter causes a large inﬂuence on the loss, then the model is sensitive to it. More speciﬁcally, we deﬁne a deep neural network with parameters Θ = [ θ 1 , ..., θ J ] ∈ R J , where for j = 1 , ..., J , θ j ∈ R denotes each parameter. We further deﬁne Θ j, − j = [0 , ..., 0 , θ j , 0 , ..., 0] ∈ R J . We denote the loss of the model as L ( Θ ) , and the gradients of the loss with respect to Θ as ∇ Θ L ( Θ ) . The sensitivity of the j -th parameter is deﬁned as the magnitude of the gradient-weight product: This deﬁnition is derived from the ﬁrst-order Taylor expansion of L ( · ) with respect to θ j at Θ . Speciﬁcally, I j approximates the absolute change of the loss given the removal of θ j : The sensitivity was originally introduced for model pruning (Molchanov et al., 2016; 2019; Theis et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2019), and it was commonly used as an “importance score” for model weights. The parameters with high sensitivity are of high importance and should be kept (Lubana & Dick, 2020). Parameters with low sensitivity are considered redundant, and they can be safely pruned with only marginal inﬂuence on the model loss.

2.2 A DAPTIVE L EARNING R ATE M ETHODS

 Adaptive learning rate methods adjust the learning rate of each individual parameter based on the training progress. Most of these methods focus on adapting the training to the optimization landscape, e.g., AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), AdaDelta (Zeiler, 2012), RMSProp (Hinton et al., 2012), Adam(Kingma & Ba, 2014) and RAdam (Liu et al., 2019a). Their purpose is to make the model converge faster to the ﬁrst-order stationary solutions. Speciﬁcally, these methods prefer updating the weights with smaller second-order moments, as the loss function is generally ﬂat along directions corresponding to such weights. There are also some adaptive learning rate methods focusing on the perspective of improving model generalization (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018; Foret et al., 2020). For example, AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) propose to decouple the weight decay and gradient update to avoid regularizing weights that have larger gradient magnitudes with a weaker strength.

3 M ETHOD

 We introduce our proposed adaptive learning rate schedule, SAGE. Our method customizes a speciﬁc learning rate for each parameter at each iteration. A parameter’s learning rate at a certain iteration is determined by two factors: sensitivity and its local temporal variation. Sensitivity of the parameters. At the t -th iteration, following Eq. (1), we deﬁne the sensitivity of θ ( t ) j as (2) which reﬂects the inﬂuence of removing θ ( t ) j in the model loss. In previous literature, θ ( t ) j is considered redundant when I ( t ) j is small. In contrast, we hypothesize that θ ( t ) j is just insufﬁciently trained and under-ﬁtted, and can become less redundant when receiving further training. Local temporal variation. Recall that the sensitivity measure involves excessive uncertainty, which comes from: (1) Sensitivity is measured based on a randomly sampled mini-batch of the training data at each iteration, which leads to a large variance; (2) Sensitivity can be unstable and vary drastically, as changes of the model introduce extra uncertainty to the measure. 3 One way to measure the uncertainty of sensitivity of θ j is the absolute change of sensitivity, i.e., | I ( t ) j − I ( t − 1) j | . Such a quantity often has a large variance in practice. Therefore, we propose to keep track of an exponential moving average of I ( t ) j as where (cid:98) I ( ) j = 0 and β 0 ∈ (0 , 1) is a hyper-parameter. Based on (cid:98) I ( t ) j , we measure the uncertainty of the j -th parameter’s sensitivity using the local temporal variation deﬁned as: We remark that a large U ( t ) j implies that there exists high uncertainty in I ( t ) j , and therefore it is not yet a reliable indicator of the redundancy of θ ( t ) j . Algorithm. We denote the learning rate at the t -th iteration as η ( t ) under the original schedule. Then the sensitivity-guided learning rate for the j -th parameter at the t -th iteration can be computed as where 0 < (cid:15) (cid:28) 1 prevents zero learning rate and zero denominator. Algorithm 2 shows the SAGE algorithm for SGD, and extensions to other algorithms, such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014), are straightforward (Appendix A.4.1). In Eq. (4), we place (cid:98) I ( t ) j in the denominator, as one of our goals is to encourage all parameters to be sufﬁciently trained. If (cid:98) I ( t ) j is small, we promote its training by increasing its learning rate. If (cid:98) I ( t ) j is large, we slow down its training to prevent overﬁtting by decreasing its learning rate. We place U ( t ) j in the numerator to measure the uncertainty in the sensitivity. A large U ( t ) j implies I ( t ) j is not yet a reliable indicator of the redundancy in θ ( t ) j . We thus avoid signiﬁcantly decreasing its learning rate. Algorithm 1 Input: Model parameters Θ ∈ R J ; Data D ; Learning rate schedule η ( · ) ; Total training iteration T ; Moving average coefﬁcient β 0 . 1: Initialize (cid:98) I (0) = 0 ∈ R J . 2: for t = 1 , ..., T do 3: Sample a minibatch b ( t ) from D . 4: Compute gradient ∇ Θ ( t ) L ( b ( t ) , Θ ( t ) ) . 5: I ( t ) = | Θ ( t ) (cid:12) ∇ Θ ( t ) L ( b ( t ) , Θ ( t ) ) | . 6: (cid:98) I ( t ) = β 0 (cid:98) I ( t − 1) + (1 − β 0 ) I ( t ) . 7: U ( t ) = | I ( t ) − (cid:98) I ( t ) | . 8 : Θ ( t +1) = Θ ( t ) − η ( t ) ( U ( t ) + (cid:15) ) (cid:11) ( (cid:98) I ( t ) + (cid:15) ) (cid:12) ∇ Θ ( t ) L ( b ( t ) , Θ ( t ) ) . 9: end for Computation and memory usage. SAGE adds a marginal cost to computation and memory usage. At each iteration, we only perform an extra element-wise multiplication between the weight matrix and the corresponding gradient matrix obtained through back-propagation. The only memory cost is to store the exponential moving average of sensitivity.

4 E XPERIMENTS

 We evaluate SAGE on widely used benchmarks for natural language understanding (NLU), neural machine translation (NMT), and image classiﬁcation.

4.1 N ATURAL L ANGUAGE U NDERSTANDING

 Model and data. We evaluate the ﬁne-tuning performance of the pre-trained language models, BERT-base (Devlin et al., 2018) and RoBERTa-large (Liu et al., 2019b), on the General Language 4 Understanding Evaluation (GLUE, Wang et al. (2018)) benchmark. GLUE contains nine NLU tasks, including textual entailment, question answering, sentiment analysis, and text similarity. Details about the benchmark are deferred to Appendix A.1.1. Implementation Details. We implement our method using the MT-DNN code-base 1 . We follow the suggested training and hyper-parameters settings from Liu et al. (2020). Speciﬁcally, we adopt Adam and Adamax (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with corrected weight decay (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) as the baseline optimizer and we set β = (0 . 9 , 0 . 999) . We use a linear-decay learning rate schedule, and we apply SAGE to both Adam and Adamax. We select learning rates in range of { 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 } × { 10 − 5 , 10 − 4 } . We select β 0 in range of [0 . 6 , 0 . 9] with an increment of 0 . 05 . Other training details are reported in Appendix A.1.2. Main results. Table 2 and Table 3 show the evaluation results on the GLUE benchmark. The dev results are averaged over 5 different random seeds, and all gains are statistically signiﬁcant 2 . We select the best single task model for test evaluation. . Our method gains 1 . 4 on dev and 1 . 1 on test of the task-average score on BERT-base. In large datasets, i e., MNLI (392K) and QNLI (108K), SAGE improves around 0 . 5 points. In small datasets, i e., RTE (2.5K) and CoLA (8.5K), we obtain more than 2 points of improvements. Such observations indicate that SAGE is very effective on the small datasets. Furthermore, SAGE improves upon RoBERTa-large by 0 . 6 average scores, suggesting SAGE can still achieve signiﬁcant improvements for larger and more adequately pre-trained models than BERT-base.

4.



N EURAL M ACHINE T RANSLATION

 Model and Data. We evaluate SAGE on the Transformer-base NMT models (Vaswani et al., 2017) using two widely used NMT datasets, IWSLT’14 De-En (Cettolo et al., 2015) 3 and WMT’16 En-De (Bojar et al., 2016) 4 . IWSLT’14 De-En is a low-resource dataset, which contains 160K sentence 1 https ://github.com/namisan/mt-dnn 2 The dev results on RoBERTa-large are averaged over 3 different random seeds. All results have passed a paired student t-test with p-values less than 0 . 05 . The detailed statistics are summarized in Appendix A.1.3. 3 https://wit3.fbk.eu/ 4 http://data.statmt.org/wmt16/translation-task/ 5 pairs. WMT’16 - is a rich-resource dataset, 4.5M sentence are Appendix 1. Implementation Details. We implement the algorithms using the fairseq code-base and follow the training and hyper-parameters settings from Ott et al. (2018; 2019). Speciﬁcally, we adopt the inverse square root learning rate schedule and we employ Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) as the optimizer with β = (0 . 9 , 0 . 98) . We apply SAGE to the same setting. We select learning rates in range of { 5 , 7 } × 10 − 5 ∪ { 1 , 2 } × 10 − 4 and select β 0 in range of { 0 . 5 , 0 . 6 , 0 . 7 , 0 . 8 , 0 . 9 } . Comprehensive training details are reported in Appendix A.2.2. Main results. Table 4 shows the BLEU scores on the IWSLT’14 De-En and the WMT’16 En-De test set, where SAGE improves around 0 . 6 and 0 . 4 points, respectively. This suggests that other than ﬁne-tuning, SAGE can also improve the generalization of trained-from-scratch models in both low-resource and rich-resource settings.

4.3 I MAGE C LASSIFICATION

 Model and data. We evaluate SAGE using Vision Transformer models (ViT) on the CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and ILSVRC-2012 ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009). Speciﬁcally, we evaluate the ﬁne-tuning performance of the ViT-base and ViT-large pre-trained using ImageNet-21k, a superset of ImageNet dataset with 21 k classes and 14 M images. Data and pre-processing details are deferred to Appendix A.3.1. Implementation details. All experiments follow the suggested training conﬁguration of Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) and a jax-implemented code base 5 . We adopt SGD as the baseline optimizer with a momentum factor 0 . 9 . We ﬁne-tune the models for 100 K steps for CIFAR100, and 200 K steps for ImageNet. We select learning rates in range of { 0 . 02 , 0 . 05 , 0 . 08 , 0 . 1 } and select β 0 in range of { 0 . 85 , 0 . 90 , 0 . 95 } . Comprehensive training details are reported in Appendix A.3.2. Main results. Table 5 shows the evaluation results on CIFAR100 and ImageNet. SAGE outperforms baselines by a signiﬁcant margin. This demonstrates that SAGE is quite general, and can be applied to various tasks (e.g., NLP and computer vision) and optimizers (e.g., Adam, Adamax and SGD).

5 A NALYSIS

 We verify that SAGE leads to more sufﬁcient training (Section 5.1), better generalization performance (Section 5.2), and is complementary to existing state-of-the-art regularization methods (Section 5.3). We also provide ablation studies in Appendix A.4.4.

5.1 SAGE L EADS TO M ORE S UFFICIENT T RAINING

 Recall that SAGE adjusts the learning rate for each parameter according to two factors: the sensitivity of parameters and the local temporal variation of sensitivity. By inspecting these factors, we verify that SAGE leads to more sufﬁcient training. The sensitivity distribution is more concentrated. Figure 2 shows the sensitivity distribution of parameters in the SAGE optimized models and the baseline models. We select the hyper-parameters that yield the best generalization performance on the BERT-base model, and we evaluate the sensitivity of each parameter using the entire training set. See Appendix A.4.2 for implementation details. We observe that the sensitivity distribution exhibits a lower variance in the SAGE optimized models than the baseline models. This suggests that the sensitivity of parameters becomes more concentrated. 5 https://github.com/google-research/vision_transformer 6 i t r i o S n s y QNLI 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1e 6 SST-2 0 2 4 1e 8 MRPC 0 2 4 6 1e 8 In other words the amount of each parameter’s contribution is more balanced, and the model is more sufﬁciently trained. Even the most redundant parameters contribute to the model performance. Recall that sensi- tivity is a type of importance score in pruning, which is a straightforward approach to measure each parameter’s contribution. Therefore we conduct an unstructured, one-shot pruning experiment on the ﬁne-tuned BERT-base models. Speciﬁcally we remove up to 40% parameters 6 with the lowest sensitivity scores and evaluate the pruned models’ performance. We average the results over 5 models trained with different random seeds. Figure 3 Upper shows the generalization performance of the pruned models. To ease the comparison, Figure 3 Lower shows the change in generalization performance with respect to the un-pruned models We have the following observations: • The pruning performance of the SAGE optimized models remains higher than that of the baseline models (Figure 3 Upper ). • Even the most redundant parameters in the SAGE optimized models makes contributions (Figure 3 Lower ). When there are over 80% of weights remaining, the pruning performance of the baseline models is comparable or even superior than their un-pruned alternatives. In contrast, the performance of the SAGE optimized models consistently deteriorates. This suggests that the most redundant parameters in the baseline models fail to contribute, while those in the SAGE optimized models are trained more sufﬁciently and are able to make contributions. 6 Embedding weights are excluded. 7 Sensitivity is a reliable indicator of redundancy. We visualize the local temporal variation (Fig- ure 4) to verify that sensitivity indeed becomes a more reliable indicator of redundancy in SAGE than in the baselines. We track the variation for all parameters in the BERT-base model at each iteration, and we evaluate the variation based on the current mini-batch of training data. See Appendix A.4.2 for implementation details. We observe that the local temporal variation in SAGE remains lower or decreases faster than in the baselines for all tasks. For example, the variation in the baseline approach remains large in QNLI. In contrast, the variation in SAGE decreases, suggesting the sensitivity indeed stabilizes and becomes a reliable indicator of redundancy.

5.2 SAGE L EADS TO B ETTER G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE

 We verify that SAGE leads to better generalization performance through inspecting the learning curves, decision boundary and hyper-parameter search space. Learning Curves. Figure 6 shows the training loss, validation loss, learning rate, and sensitivity score obtained by ﬁne-tuning BERT-base on SST-2. All ex- periment details are deferred to Appendix A.4.3. We have two major observations: 1) SAGE’s validation loss descends faster and SAGE is less prone to over- ﬁtting. This observation suggests that SAGE has a regularization effect and reduces the model variance. 2) SAGE’s variance of the sensitivity score becomes lower through training, aligning with our observation in Figure 2. This suggests that SAGE gives rise to a more balanced and sufﬁcient training. Both observations agree with our initial motivation (Figure 1) that redundancy elimination can lead to better generalization. Hyper-parameter Study. Figure 7 shows the validation accuracy heatmap obtained by ﬁne-tuning BERT-base on the RTE dataset. We plot the accuracy obtained by training with different learning rates, Adam’s β s and SAGE’s β 0 s. We can observe that SAGE consistently achieves a better generalization 8 performance within a larger region of hyper-parameter search space under different β 0 s. We also provide a hyper-parameter study for more datasets in Appendix A.4.5. Decision Boundary. Figure 5 shows the decision boundary predicted with Adam and SAGE on the Two Moon dataset. Speciﬁcally, we train a multi-layer perceptron with 3 hidden layers, each with a hidden dimension of 100 . The decision boundary predicted with SAGE is smoothier and has a larger margin than with Adam, suggesting SAGE produces a better generalized model.

5.3 C OMBINE WITH S TATE -O F -T HE -A RT M ETHODS

 We further show that SAGE is complementary to existing state-of-the-art regularization methods. Speciﬁcally, we apply SAGE to SMART (Jiang et al., 2019), a state-of-the-art smoothness-inducing adversarial regularization method. As shown in Table 6, SAGE can further improve upon SMART, suggesting the two techniques are complementary.

6 D ISCUSSION

 SAGE is complementary to Adaptive Gradient Methods. Our proposed method and the main- stream adaptive gradient methods (e.g., Adam and AdaGrad) are for fundamentally different purposes. The mainstream adaptive gradient methods aim to improve optimization by adapting to the optimiza- tion landscape, while SAGE aims to improve generalization by eliminating the weight redundancy. The quantities of our interest (i.e., Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)) are related to the weight redundancy. They are not directly related to the moduli of the objective function, e.g., smoothness, curvature (which are of the interests for optimization). As shown in our experiments (See Section 4), we do not observe any conﬂicts between the two methods, as SAGE improves the model generalization performance when being combined with several adaptive gradient methods (e.g., Adam). Redundant Weights vs. Insufﬁciently Trained Weights. Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) suggests that, in a randomly initialized network, there exists a well-initialized subnetwork, which outperforms any other subnetworks and matches the full model’s performance. This suggests the rest parameters contribute marginally to the model performance. Although the initialization of these parameters may not be satisfactory, SAGE provides them sufﬁcient training so that they can learn to contribute.

7 C ONCLUSION

 We begin with a hypothesis that the redundant parameters can become useful if they are sufﬁciently trained by desirable optimization strategies. We

verify this hypothesis by proposing an adaptive learning schedule – SAGE, which excites the under-ﬁtted parameters to reduce redundancy and regularize the well-ﬁtted parameters to prevent overﬁtting. We demonstrate that SAGE can beneﬁt model generalization in a wide range of tasks and strengthen various types of optimizers

 . 9

R EFERENCES

 10 11 12 13