

M EMORIZING T RANSFORMERS

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Language models typically need to be trained or ﬁnetuned in order to acquire new knowledge, which involves updating their weights. We instead envision language models that can simply read and memorize new data at inference time, thus acquiring new knowledge immediately. In this work, we extend language models with the ability to memorize the internal representations of past inputs. Despite the fact that our implementation of memory is not differentiable, we demonstrate that an approximate k NN lookup into the memory improves language modeling across various benchmarks and tasks, including generic webtext (C4), math papers (arXiv), books (PG-19), code (Github), as well as formal theorems (Isabelle). We show that the performance steadily improves when we increase the size of memory up to 131k tokens. We also ﬁnd that the model is capable of making use of newly deﬁned functions and theorems during test time.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) have become one of the most widely-used neural network architectures for a variety of tasks, especially natural language processing (NLP). They have proved to be immensely scalable, achieving state of the art performance for models of all sizes, up to and including giant models with billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020). However, although transformers scale very well with the number of layers and parameters, they scale very poorly with sequence length, and their computational and memory complexity is infamously O ( N 2 ) . Due to this limitation, training of transformers typically proceeds by chopping long documents into much shorter subsequences, which deprives the model of information about the larger context in which a passage occurs. On many tasks, such as processing of books, source code, technical papers, and theorems, the ability to attend to far-away tokens is important. In source code, for example, references to classes and functions may occur quite far from the places in which they are deﬁned. Attention over long sequences is also useful as a form of rapid learning. Facts and information which are stored in the form of weight matrices must be slowly trained over hundreds of thousands of training steps. By using attention, however, a model can simply memorize facts (e.g. function deﬁnitions) by storing them as (key, value) pairs in long-term memory, and then retrieve those facts later by creating a query that attends to them. Memorizing transformers are motivated by our desire to use transformers for program synthesis and formal reasoning. For these tasks, the model must be able to work with large and continuously changing code repositories and knowledge bases, and it should be possible to utilize newly added code or facts immediately without the need for retraining or ﬁnetuning. Our goal is to develop forms of attention that can scale to the size of an entire code repository, or a database of theorems. We demonstrate that a simple, effective, and scalable way to increase the size of the attention context is to use approximate k -nearest-neighbor ( k NN) search into a large external memory of (key, value) pairs. There are efﬁcient implementations of approximate k NN lookup on TPU, GPU, and CPU, including distributed implementations (Guo et al., 2020), which opens the door to extremely large external memories. In contrast to most other work on sparse, or long-range attention (c.f. Section 2), we treat the external memory as a large “cache”, and gradients are not back-propagated into the cache. This is a potential limitation, because it means that the network can only learn to query the external memory, and cannot 1 directly learn what keys and values to put into it. However, we demonstrate empirically that (key, value) pairs which are useful for local (and thus fully differentiable) self-attention are also useful for long-range attention. Using a non-differentiable cache is critical to scalability. The keys and values are a function of model parameters, so attempting to backpropagate gradients into the external memory would necessarily involve computing all of the keys and values with the current model parameters on every training step. If the external memory is not differentiable, we can instead reuse keys and values from prior training steps. With our technique, we are easily able to scale external memory up to a sequence lengths of 131k or 262k tokens on a single device, while maintaining a reasonable step time. We further optimize for speed and GPU/TPU memory by using the external memory only in a single layer, near the top of the transformer stack, rather than integrating it into every transformer layer, as is done with most other forms of attention. The lower levels of the transformer stack use classical dense attention, and are responsible for parsing, summarizing, and otherwise processing information in the input sequence, using only the local context in which tokens occur. Our k NN-augmented attention layer then stores the processed (key, value) pairs into external memory, and also issues queries to retrieve long-term memories from it. One additional dense attention layer at the top of the stack then integrates the local and long-context information. We show that model perplexity steadily improves with the size of external memory on a variety of language modelling tasks, including C4 (long documents only), Github code repositories, PG-19 books, formal proofs in Isabelle, and arXiv math papers. We further show that models can generalize to larger memory sizes than they were trained on: models trained with a small k NN memory show gains from using a much larger memory at inference time. Finally, we show that our models are actually using external memory in the way that we had hoped, e.g. by looking up the deﬁnitions of lemmas in a theorem proving corpus.

2 R ELATED W ORK

 A great deal of work has been done on efﬁcient long-range attention mechanisms; see Tay et al. (2020b) for a recent survey. Sliding windows (Beltagy et al., 2020) use a long sequence, but attend within a smaller window, thus reducing complexity to the window size, rather than total sequence length. Approximate mechanisms such as Linformer (Wang et al., 2020), and Performer (Choromanski et al., 2021) refactor the attention matrix by using a different kernel than softmax to obtain O ( N ) complexity. Pooling strategies such as Hierarchical 1D attention (Zhu & Soricut, 2021), and Combiner (Ren et al., 2021) apply pooling or averaging over tokens at longer distances. Sparse strategies such as Big Bird (Zaheer et al., 2020) select only a subset of tokens to attend to; Routing Transformers (Roy et al., 2021) use clustering to select the subset, while Reformer (Kitaev et al., 2020) relies on hashing. Hierarchical mechanisms (Ainslie et al., 2020) combine multiple tokens into phrases or sentences to reduce sequence length. Expire-span (Sukhbaatar et al., 2021) prunes far-away tokens that it learns are “unimportant”. See Tay et al. (2020a) for a comparison of many of these approaches. Feedback transformers (Fan et al., 2020) use a recurrent architecture, in which each token attends to the output of the ﬁnal layer, rather than to the previous layer. Recurrence does not increase the size of the attention context, but it expands the receptive ﬁeld (i.e, the number of prior tokens which can potentially affect the output at a given position in the sequence) to an unlimited sequence length, at the cost of parallelism and training speed. Truncated backpropagation through time (Williams & Peng, 1990) was originally introduced as a way of training recurrent neural networks (RNN) over very long sequences, when the entire sequence does not ﬁt in memory. The sequence is chopped into segments, and after each training step, the ﬁnal RNN state for the segment is saved in a non-differentiable cache, and used as the initial state on the next training step. Neural caches (Grave et al., 2017) extend the cache to contain a record of many prior hidden states, and attend over them. Transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019) applies this technique to transformers; it caches the (key,value) pairs computed from the previous training step, and uses them as a preﬁx for the tokens on the next training step, which yields signiﬁcant gains on long documents. Our work is a continuation of this line of research. We use a very large cache, combined with an approximate k NN attention mechanism over it. 2 cat in the hat cat in the hat the said dense attention + FFN K nearest neighbor lookup. dense attention + FFN … more layers … input tokens external memory – cached (key, value) pairs Will be added to external memory after the current training step. joint KNN/local attention + FFN dense attention + FFN dense attention + FFN cat in the hat cat in the hat the to output predictions local context embedding layer softmax layer joint attention matrix queries queries top-k keys keys from local context Sukhbaatar et al. (2019) make the observation that the feed-foward portion of a transformer layer functions very much like attention, if one simply replaces the relu activation with softmax. They implement a combined attention over both tokens from the input sequence and a learned (and differentiable) “memory”. Lample et al. (2019) exploit this observation to replace the FFN with a fast k NN lookup over a much larger “memory”, and achieve large gains in model accuracy without much computation overhead. (We use k NN lookup for attention, not as a replacement for the FFN.) Non-differentiable external memory has been used in different ways by other architectures. (Khan- delwal et al., 2020) run a pre-trained model over an entire corpus, and construct a large table of (key,token) pairs. They then use that table to replace the ﬁnal softmax layer for token selection in the model, which results in signiﬁcant improvements in language modeling. Their technique demonstrates the advantage of replacing trainable weights (in the softmax layer) with a large table that uses memorization. Fan et al. (2021) use an architecture that is somewhat similar to ours; they augment a transformer with a k NN retrieval module that can access external knowledge from a database. However, their lookup mechanism is quite different from ours; they average over multiple tokens, and then re-encode the results with the current trained encoder weights. We use a decoder-only model, and treat external memory as a simple cache. k -nearest-neighbor lookup is a general-purpose technique that is used for a wide variety of machine learning and retrieval tasks, and many high-performance implementations are available for various architectures (Johnson et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2020). Memory-efﬁcient Transformers (Gupta et al., 2021) replace dense attention with a k NN lookup to increase speed and reduce memory usage.

3 M ETHOD

 The architecture of our k NN-augmented transformer is shown in Figure 1. The bulk of the model is a vanilla, decoder-only transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017). The input text is tokenized, and the tokens are embedded into vector space. The embedding vectors are passed through a series of transformer layers, each of which does dense self-attention, followed by a feed-forward network (FFN). Since this is a decoder-only language model, so we use a causal attention mask and the token embeddings of the last layer are used to predict the next token. We split a long document up into subsequences of length 512 tokens. Each subsequence is used as the input for one training step. In contrast to standard practice, we do not shufﬂe the subsequences; instead, each long document is fed into the transformer sequentially, from beginning to end, as is done with transformer-XL (Dai et al., 2019). 3 C Document E Document F ... Document G ...

3.1 k NN- AUGMENTED RETRIEVAL LAYER

 The second-to-last transformer layer is a k NN-augmented attention layer. This layer combines two forms of attention. The ﬁrst is standard dense self-attention into the local context , which is the input subsequence for the current training step. The second is an approximate k -nearest-neighbor search into the external memory . The same queries are used for both the local context, and for the external memory. The keys and values also belong to the same distribution; after each training step, the (key, value) pairs in the local context are appended to the end of the external memory. If the document is very long, old (key, value) pairs will be dropped from the memory to make room for new ones. Thus, for each head, the external memory keeps a cache of the prior M (key, value) pairs, where M is the memory size. The k NN lookup will return a set of retrieved memories , which consist of the top- k (key, value) pairs that k NN search returns for each token in the input subsequence. The dot-product scores for the k retrieved memories are concatenated with the scores from dense self-attention over the local context prior to applying softmax. In other words, the external memory is treated as an extension of the local context; each query attends to both the local context and external memory jointly. The output of the k NN-augmented attention layer is a weighted sum of the values retrieved from external memory, and values from the local context. More formally, let h i be the output vector for the i th token. It is deﬁned as follows, where q , k , and v are the query, key, and value vectors for the local context, ˜k , ˜v are the key and value vectors returned from the k NN search, e ij and ˜ e ij are the dot-product similarity scores, and a ij , ˜ a ik are the attention weights. Notice that unlike self-attention, k NN retrieves a different set of ( ˜k , ˜v ) for each token; ˜v ik thus denotes the k th value in the set of retrieved memories for the i th token. Position bias. For dense attention within the local context, we use T5 relative position biases (Raffel et al., 2020), which adds a bias to the similarity score e i,j that is a function of the relative distance between i and j . As noted by Dai et al. (2019), adding a global position encoding to each token does not work well when processing long documents. We don’t use a position bias for the retrieved memories. Experiments on the PG19 dataset (Sun et al., 2021) have shown that relative position does not appear to matter at long range, and the T5 relative bias puts all long-range tokens in the same bucket anyway. Batching. Figure 2 illustrates how multiple long documents of different lengths are packed into a batch, and split into subsequences. When training with batch size greater than 1, each sub-sequence in the batch comes from a different document, and thus requires a separate external memory, which is cleared at the start of each new document.

3.2 D ISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFT

 Because each long document is processed over multiple training steps, there is a distributional shift in the keys and values that are stored in external memory. The model parameters that produce the queries change over time, and will thus have shifted since the keys and values were stored. For very large memories, older records may become “stale.” In some of our experiments, we observed that training models from scratch with a large memory sometimes resulted in worse performance than pretraining the model with a small memory of size 4 8192, and then ﬁnetuning it on a larger memory. This training instability could be due to staleness. However, models seem to be able to cope with a limited degree of staleness (with the small memory) by adjusting their queries accordingly. There is a signiﬁcant computational advantage to non-differentiable memory, despite potential issues with staleness. On each training step, the model has access to not only the current input data, but also to computations that were done over many prior training steps. In other words, we can reuse the computations done on prior steps to augment the current training step.

3.3 A PPROXIMATE k NN

 We employ approximate k NN search instead of exact k NN search for two reasons. First, it improves the efﬁciency of our model signiﬁcantly, and, second, it allows us to explore the feasibility of using approximations of k NN in our model. We use a simple approximation of k NN for TPUs, which has a recall of about 90%, i.e. 90% of the true top k are returned in the approximate top k . There are various efﬁcient approximate k NN algorithms available for CPU and GPU/TPU, for example through faiss (Johnson et al., 2021) or ScaNN (Guo et al., 2020), which can, in principle, scale into the “billions”, and typically have considerably better recall than 90%.

4 E XPERIMENTS

 We evaluate the effect of adding external memory on ﬁve language modeling tasks, all of which involve long-form text: English language books (PG-19), long web articles (C4), technical math papers (arXiv Math), source code (Github), and formal theorems (Isabelle). The results show signiﬁcant improvements in the perplexity of the model with the addition of external memory. We experimented with various sizes of external memory, from 2048 to as high as 262k. On most of the datasets, we saw an initial sharp gain from adding a small external memory, followed by smaller but steadily increasing gains as the size of the memory was increased. Interestingly, using even a small external memory of size 2048 provides a gain in perplexity which is almost as good as using a local context of size 2048 but no memory (e.g. Table 7). This is surprising, because the external memory is not differentiable, and is added only to one layer of the transformer, whereas increasing the context size is differentiable and affects all layers. We conclude that the lower layers of a transformer don’t really need long-range context, and having a differentiable memory is not as important as one might suspect. We further studied what the model was actually retrieving from external memory, by ﬁnding which tokens showed the biggest improvements in cross-entropy loss when the size of the memory was increased, and then examining the top- k retrieved memories for those tokens. We found that the model gained the most when looking up rare words, such as proper names, references, citations, and function names, where the ﬁrst use of a name is too far away from subsequent uses to ﬁt in the local context. This result is in keeping with the prior analysis of long-context transformers on PG19 (Sun et al., 2021), which found similar lookup patterns.

4.1 E XPERIMENTAL M ETHOD

 We used a 6-layer decoder-only transformer with an embedding size of 1024, 16 attention heads of size 64, and an FFN hidden layer of size 4096. For all of our experiments, we used k = 128 . Unless speciﬁed otherwise, we use the second-to-last layer (i.e., 5 th layer) as the k NN augmented attention layer. We also performed experiments to show the gain from having more than one k NN augmented attention layer, and for those experiments, we augmented layers 4 and 5. We used a sentence-piece (Kudo & Richardson, 2018) tokenizer with a vocabulary size of 32K, label smoothing of 0.1, and a dropout of 0.1. We did not conduct a hyperparameter search. We used the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 3 · 10 − 4 , a linear warmup schedule for the ﬁrst 1000 steps, followed by square root decay. We adjusted the batch size so that the total number of tokens in a batch remains constant, at 65536 tokens (in the local context) per batch. We trained the models from scratch for 500K steps on all the datasets, except Isabelle. Isabelle is a small dataset, so we stopped training after 100K steps when the model began to overﬁt. 5 We noticed that if we trained models with a large memory from scratch, the training became unstable, possibly due to distributional shift early in the training (See Section 3.2). Thus, for large memories, we ﬁrst pretrain the model with a memory size of 8192 for 500K steps, and then ﬁnetune it on a much larger memory for an additional 5000 steps. We show results for the large memories both before and after ﬁne-tuning, written before → after . We found that increasing the size of the memory provides an immediate gain, even before any ﬁne-tuning. This result stands in stark contrast to the usual issue with transformers, which is that a model trained using one sequence length does not generalize to longer sequences (Press et al., 2021). We hypothesize that our model is able to generalize to longer memories because the k NN lookup always returns k results, with no position bias, regardless of the size of the memory.

4.2 A R X IV M ATH

 For the arXiv dataset, we collected a corpus of papers by downloading them via the arXiv Bulk Data Access 1 . We ﬁltered papers to include only articles labeled as “Mathematics” and whose L A TEX source was available. Because L A T E X source has many symbols, especially in math papers, the tokenizer will tend to output small (e.g. 1 character) subwords. Thus, the number of tokens per paper in this dataset is roughly comparable to the number of tokens per book in PG19. Results are shown in Table 3. Increasing the memory size. The arXiv math dataset displays the initial sharp drop in perplexity from adding external memory, and demonstrates that a memory of size 2048 is about as good as training with a local context length of 2048. Even without ﬁnetuning, increasing the size of the memory leads to a steady improvement in perplexity, from 2048 up to 131 K. Note that training with external memory of size 8192, and then testing with a larger memory of 32k (Table 3) actually yields better results than training from scratch with 32k (Table 4). The drop in perplexity from 2.927 at a memory size of 8192, to 2.877 at a memory size of 32k is signiﬁcant, especially since it requires no additional ﬁnetuning, and no additional parameters have been added to the model. Nevertheless, we did observe diminishing returns; the improvements past 32 k were very small, and vanished altogether after 131 k. It should be noted that very few papers in the arXiv dataset are longer than 131 k tokens, so it is not surprising that additional memory doesn’t help past that point. 1 https://arxiv.com/help/bulk_data 6 Finetuning. An additional 5000 steps of ﬁnetuning further improves perplexity. Although the model can make use of additional memory without ﬁnetuning, it does beneﬁt from being allowed to adapt to the increased memory size. Number of k NN layers. We also experimented with using two k NN layers, rather than just one. Using two k NN attention layers does offer a modest improvement over a single layer. In general, it is better two have two smaller memory layers, than one large layer twice the size. Where is memory most useful? Figure 6 shows a visualization of which tokens show an improve- ment when the size of the external memory is increased. We selected a math paper at random, and plotted the difference in cross entropy loss for each token x i in the paper, comparing two mod- els with the same parameters, but with memories of different sizes. ∆ i = cross-entropy 8192 ( x i ) − cross-entropy 32 k ( x i ) . Positive values show an improvement in loss. The x -axis on the chart is the token number i , while the y -axis is ∆ i . For the ﬁrst 8192 tokens, the difference between the two models is zero, since the larger capacity of the 32k memory isn’t being used yet. However, after token 8193 , we can see that the larger memory helps, on average, over the smaller memory. The beneﬁt is not universal, since the predictions for some tokens become worse, possibly due to the fact that a relevant retrieved memory no longer makes it into the top- k when the size of the external memory is increased. This ﬁgure also shows that the beneﬁt of external memory is somewhat sparse. The improvement in perplexity seems to be mainly driven by a small percentage of tokens that obtain a large improvement in cross-entropy loss when using the larger memory. How is the memory being used? Given that only a subset of tokens shows improvement from external memory, we did a further investigation into exactly what those tokens are using the memory for. We took the same math paper illustrated in Figure 6 as a case study, and ﬁltered out those tokens which showed the largest improvement in cross-entropy loss. For each of those tokens, we examined which previous tokens appeared in the top- k retrieved memories. Several examples are shown in Table 5, which includes both the retrieved token and its surrounding context. We observe that many of the gains in cross-entropy loss took place when trying to predict the name of bibitems, citations, or references, by looking up the references and citations used previously in the paper. Such lookups usually span over the entire paper, which is much longer than 8192 tokens, providing a plausible explanation for the gain beyond memory size of 8192.

4.3 G ITHUB

 We used BigQuery 2 to obtain a large corpus of Github source code repositories. Individual source code ﬁles are often fairly short, and there are many dependencies and cross-references between ﬁles in the repository. To capture these dependencies, we created one long document for each Github repository by traversing the directory tree, and concatenating all of the ﬁles within it. The order in which ﬁles are traversed within the repository is random, but each subdirectory is processed as a unit, and all the ﬁles within it are close to each other in the resulting document. Source code is usually structured so that related ﬁles are all grouped together in the same subdirectory; this traversal preserves that structure, while still shufﬂing ﬁles and subdirectories in random order. The Github results are shown in Table 7. As before, numbers below the midline are trained with memory size 8192 , and then ﬁnetuned on a larger memory size, and we show perplexity both before and after ﬁnetuning. The Github results largely mirror the arXiv results. There are steady gains in perplexity with increasing memory size, but this time only up to 32 k. There is still a slight 2 https://console.cloud.google.com/marketplace/product/github/github-repos 7 improvement at 65k, but only after ﬁnetuning. Interestingly enough, most Github repositories are small, with less than 65k tokens, so that may explain the diminishing returns. As with the arXiv papers, we also studied which tokens the model retrieved from memory. As might be expected, the model is often looking up the names of functions, and variables, as shown in Table 9.

4.4 F ORMAL MATH (I SABELLE )

 The Isabelle corpus consists of formal mathematical proofs of theories. We collected a total of 627 theories from the Archive of Formal Proofs 3 , and combined them with the Isabelle standard library to create a corpus of 684 theories. Each theory is a self-contained mathematical object, on topics such as foundational logic, advanced analysis, algebra, or cryptographic, and consists of multiple ﬁles containing proofs. As with the Github corpus, all ﬁles that make up a theory are concatenated together into one long document. Unlike the Github corpus, the ﬁles are not shufﬂed randomly, but are ordered so that later ﬁles use sub-theorems that are proved in earlier ﬁles. The results for Isabelle are shown in Table 8, and are similar to both Github and arXiv. Isabelle proofs can be quite long, and the results reﬂect that, with steadily improving perplexity up to a memory size of 131k. Adding a second k NN layer provides a greater beneﬁt than having a larger memory. Retrieving mathematical deﬁnitions. Our case study on the Isabelle corpus provides one of the clearest illustrations of how a model can make good use of external memory. When predicting the name of a mathematical object or a lemma, the model looked up the deﬁnition from earlier in the proof. Examples of this behavior are shown in Table 10. In example 1, the model retrieves a deﬁnition within the body of a lemma, markov_inequality . In example 2, it retrieves the deﬁnition of a previously deﬁned concept subgraph_threshold . In example 3, it retrieves the deﬁnition of orthonormal_system . We manually checked 10 examples where the model made a prediction of lemma names, and 8 out of 10 times model found the deﬁnition body of the lemma it needs to predict. In the other two cases, the model also looked up materials in the immediate vicinity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst demonstration that attention is capable of looking up deﬁnitions and function bodies from a large corpus. The Isabelle case study used the 2-layer retrieval model trained with an external memory of size 32 k. 3 https://www.isa-afp.org/topics.html . 8

4.5 C4 AND PG-19

 C4, the colossal cleaned common crawl, is a very large collection of documents that have been scraped from the internet (Raffel et al., 2020). Since many of the documents in C4 are very short, we ﬁltered out all documents that have less than 4096 tokens. PG-19 is a large dataset of English-language books, published prior to 1919, which were retrieved from the Project Gutenberg archive (Rae et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2021). PG-19 is one of the few public datasets that only contains full-length books, and has become a benchmark for long-range natural language text modeling. The results for C4 and PG-19 are shown in Tables 11 and 12, respectively. As before, external memory shows gains in perplexity, but only up to 32k for C4, and only up to 8k for PG-19. Most documents in C4 are less than 32k tokens long, but the same is not true of PG-19, so the diminishing returns for PG-19 are something of a surprise. Long-range references, which were common in citations (arXiv), function names (Github), and premises (Isabelle), may simply be much rarer in PG-19.

5 C ONCLUSION

 We presented a simple extension to the transformer architecture, called k NN-augmented attention, which dramatically increases the length of the context that a language model can attend to by using k -nearest-neighbor lookup into a large external memory. We demonstrated the effectiveness of external memory in a series of language modeling experiments over a variety of long-document datasets, including LaTeX documents, source code, formal proofs, and books. We showed that external memory has several advantages. First, our model showed improved perplexity with larger memory size on every data set that we studied. There is a point of diminishing returns, but only at much longer context lengths than are usually used for training transformers. Second, even a very small external memory of size 2048 results in a perplexity which is comparable to using dense attention of length 2048. Third, the models we train are capable of generalizing to larger memories; a model which is trained with a small external memory of 8192 tokens can make use of a much larger memory during inference. Unlike other forms of attention, k NN retrieval can be easily scaled up to huge memory sizes, and is thus potentially able to leverage vast knowledge bases or code repositories. How to make the best use of this capability is a topic for future work. 9

E THICS

 The ability to memorize large databases of facts could have potential ramiﬁcations for society, espe- cially if those databases include sensitive personal information or copyrighted works. However, one advantage of using an external memory is that the memory can be easily cleared of all such informa- tion, as we do at the end of each document that we train on. The same is not true of differentiable model parameters, which is where most existing architectures store facts and information that they are trained on.

R EPRODUCIBILITY

 Details of our architecture and training hyperparameters are given in Section 4.1. We plan to release our code as open source.

R EFERENCES

 10 . H-transformer-1d: Fast one-dimensional hierarchical attention for sequences. In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), ACL , 2021. 11

A L ENGTH OF INPUTS

 12

B M ORE RETRIEVING EXAMPLES IN FORMAL THEOREM PROVING CORPUS Example 1

 • Input token index: 64604 • Input token: “_” • Target token: “pair” • Surrounding context: )) by (simp add: Fourier_sum_limit_pair [OF f, symmetric] Fourier’ • Name needs to be predicted: Fourier_sum_limit_pair • Retrieved token: “Four” • Retrieved token index: 64412 • Retrieved context: 2 * n. Fourier_coefﬁcient f k * trigonometric_set k t) • Deﬁnition of the name: Example 2 • Input token index: 46175 • Input token: “tri”’ • Target token: “gon” • Surrounding context: <le>n. a k * trigonometric_set k x) • Name needs to be predicted: orthonormal_system_trigonometric_set • Retrieved token: “gon” • Retrieved token index: 35457 • Retrieved context: lemma orthonormal_system_trigonometric_set: \ n "orthonormal_system • Deﬁnition of the name: 13 Example 3 • Input token index: 49760 • Input token: “sum”’ • Target token: “m” • Surrounding context: nusing Fourier_series_square_summable [OF assms, of’ • Name needs to be predicted: Fourier_series_square_summable • Retrieved token: “sum” • Retrieved token index: 35457 • Retrieved context: lemma Fourier_series_square_summable \ n assumes: • Deﬁnition of the name: Example 4 • Input token index: 49697 • Input token: “_”’ • Target token: “system” • Surrounding context: lemma Riemann_lebesgue_square_integrable: nassumes "orthonormal_system S w • Name needs to be predicted: orthonormal_system • Retrieved token: “system” • Retrieved token index: 28052 • Retrieved context: deﬁnition orthonormal_system :: " \ ’a::euclidean’ • Deﬁnition of the name: 14 Example 5 • Input token index: 34817 • Input token: “.”’ • Target token: “b” • Surrounding context: shows "integrable (lebesgue_on {a..b}) • Retrieved token 1: “.” • Retrieved token index 1: 2416 • Retrieved context 1: lebesgue_on {a..b}) f i • Retrieved token 2: “-” • Retrieved token index 2: 2445 • Retrieved context 2: (lebesgue_on {a-c..b-c}) ( • Retrieved token 3: “-” • Retreived token index 3: 6479 • Retrieved context 3: (lebesgue_on {-pi..pi}) ( Example 6 • Input token index: 49759 • Input token: “_”’ • Target token: “sum” • Surrounding context: 0" \ n using Fourier_series_square_summable [OF assms • Retrieved token 1: “set” • Retrieved token index 1: 35044 • Retrieved context 1: deﬁnition trigonometric_set :: "nat \ <Rightarrow> • Retrieved token 2: “ier” • Retrieved token index 2: 47272 • Retrieved context 2: deﬁnition Fourier_coefﬁcient \ nwhere • Retrieved token 3: “ine” • Retrieved token index 3: 18160 • Retrieved context 3: lemma Schwartz_inequality_strong: \ nassumes “f’ • Retrieved token 4: “system” • Retrieved token index 4: 28052 • Retrieved context 4: deﬁnition orthonormal_system :: “ \ ’a::euclidean’ • Retrieved token 5: “<” • Retrieved token index 5: 47241 • Retrieved context 5: subsection \ <open>Convergence wrt the L’ • Retrieved token 6: “n” • Retrieved token index 6: 40835 • Retrieved context 6: \ n subsection \ <open>A bit of extra’ 15