

H OW (U N )F AIR IS T EXT S UMMARIZATION ?

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Creating a good summary requires carefully choosing details from the original text to accurately represent it in a limited space. If a summary contains biased information about a group, it risks passing this bias off to readers as fact. These risks increase if we consider not just one biased summary, but rather a biased summarization algorithm. Despite this, no work has measured whether these sum- marizers demonstrate biased performance. Rather, most work in summarization focuses on improving performance, ignoring questions of bias. In this paper, we demonstrate that automatic summarizers both amplify and introduce bias towards information about under-represented groups. Additionally, we show that summa- rizers are highly sensitive to document structure, making the summaries they gen- erate unstable under changes that are semantically meaningless to humans, which poses a further fairness risk. Given these results, and the large-scale potential for harm presented by biased summarization, we recommend that bias analysis be per- formed and reported on summarizers to ensure that new automatic summarization methods do not introduce bias to the summaries they generate.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 In any piece of text, bias against a group may be expressed. This bias may be explicit or implicit and can be displayed either in what information is included (e.g., including information that is exclusively negative about one group and exclusively positive about another), where in the article it comes from (e.g., only selecting sentences from the start of articles), or how it is written (e.g., saying “a man thought to be involved in crime died last night after an ofﬁcer involved shooting” vs.“a police ofﬁcer shot and killed an unarmed man in his home last night”). The presence of any bias in a longer text may be made worse by summarizing it. A summary can be seen as a presentation of the most salient points of a larger piece of text, where the deﬁnition of “salient information” will vary according to various ideologies a person holds. Due to this subjec- tivity and the space constraints a summary imposes, there is a heightened potential for summaries to contain bias. Readers, however, expect that summaries faithfully represent articles. Therefore, bias in the text of a summary is likely to go unquestioned. If a summary presents information in a way biased against a group, readers are likely to believe that the article exhibited this same bias, as checking the truth of these assumptions requires a high amount of effort. This poses several risks. First, an echo chamber effect, where the bias in generated summaries agrees with biases the reader already has. The opposite is also a risk. An article may present more or less the same amounts of in- formation about multiple groups whereas its summary includes more information about one group, leading readers to believe the most important information in the article is about only one group. As writing summaries manually carries a large cost, automatic summarization is an appealing solu- tion. However, where one biased summary is a problem, a biased summarization algorithm capable of summarizing thousands of articles in the time it takes a human to generate one, is a disaster. In recent years, automatic summarization has increased in availability, both for personal and commer- cial use. Summarization algorithms have suggested for use on news articles, medical notes, business documents, legal texts, personal documents 1 , and conversation transcripts 2 . Despite the sensitivity of these applications, to the best of our knowledge, no work has measured the bias of the summaries generated by common summarization algorithms. 1 https://ai.googleblog.com/2022/03/auto-generated-summaries-in-google-docs.html?m=1 2 https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/language-service/summarization/overview 1 In this paper, we present the ﬁrst empirical analysis to measure the bias of automatic summarizers, for seven different techniques (ranging from the ones based on information retrieval methods to the ones using large language models; and for high impact techniques provided by Microsoft and Ope- nAI). We design a method to quantitatively measure to what extent article structure inﬂuences bias in the generated summaries, as well as the inclusion of information about different gender, racial/ethic, and religious groups. We also study the causes of bias by varying the inﬂuential factors, including the summarization parameters, and distribution of input documents. We show that summarizers: 1. Can suppress information about minority group in the original text. 2. Prioritize information about certain groups over others, regardless of the amount of information about them in the original text. 3. Amplify patterns of bias already shown in human summaries in where information is selected from in the original text. 4. Demonstrate sensitivity to the structure of the articles they summarize, and are fragile to changes in those articles that are meaningless to humans. These ﬁndings indicate that it is not safe to use automatic summarization at scale or in situations where the text they generate could inﬂuence large numbers of readers. Doing so risks misinform- ing and increasing bias held by readers. We conclude that assessments of bias in summarization algorithms should be performed, and this bias should be reduced before models are released.

2 W HAT IS B IAS IN A S UMMARIZER ?

 Let us start by deﬁning what a biased summary is. We consider a biased summary to be be any summary that misrepresents a group in some way, relative to the original text 3 , whether this is the amount or kind of information expressed. We further divide our deﬁnition of bias into two subcategories based on their cause: content bias and structure bias. These deﬁnitions draw on existing taxonomies of representational harms in NLP (Hovy & Spruit, 2016; Barocas et al., 2017), but are tailored to summarization. We deﬁne content bias as bias towards the mention of a group in a text. In this type of bias, if group A is mentioned in the article, the summarizer will generate a biased summary. Changing the structure of the text will have no effect on how biased the summary is. We further divide content bias into ﬁve subcategories: under-representation, inclusion/exclusion, inaccuracy, sentiment bias, and framing bias, and explain each in Table 1. On the other hand, we deﬁne structure bias as a bias as a result the structure of the text being sum- marized. In contrast to content bias, structure bias is invariant to the presence of information about different groups, but will change when document structure is modiﬁed. We deﬁne three structure bias subcategories: position bias, sentiment bias, and style bias, further explained in Table 1. There are situations where the line between group and structure bias is not so clear cut. For example, if articles about group A are written in a way that a summarizer has a structure bias against, but articles about group B are written in a way that does not illicit this bias, the summarizer will show a consistent bias against group A. Though this is a result of a structure bias, it is also an example of content bias because the article structure and the group being discussed are dependent.Regardless of the cause, biased summaries have the potential for real, negative effects on marginalized groups.

3 O UR M ETHODS FOR M EASURING B IAS

 Each of the types of bias deﬁned in Table 1 represents a real problem in automatic summarization. However, we are not able to explore all of these biases in this paper, and some (i.e. framing bias) would be best explored using manual linguistic analysis than computational techniques. Instead, we aim to explore the content and structure bias of summarizers along three axes: underrepresentation, position, and style. To this end, we design three experiments to measure these three different types of bias described in more detail in the following subsections. 3 While a perfectly unbiased summarizer would not misrepresent groups at all, even if the original text does, this is a strong constraint to place on a summarization algorithm that does not have a concept of social bias. 2 Data and Models For our content bias analysis, we use a synthetic article corpus, the generation of which is explained in Section 5. For all other experiments, we use the CNN/DailyMail corpus (See et al., 2017; Hermann et al., 2015). This corpus consists of 300k articles, written between 2007 and 2015, from CNN and the DailyMail. The corpus also contains reference summaries, generated from the bullet point highlights in each article. To generate summaries of these articles for our experiments, we use a four extractive and three abstractive summarizers described in Table 2 , use machine learning.

3.1 C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS

 Given articles about different (combinations of) groups, do summarizers tend to include more infor- mation about some groups than others? For example, given articles that are half about men and half about women, their summaries should contain the same ratio of information. However, a summa- rizer with a bias against women may amplify information about men and supress information about women in its summaries. To explore this problem, we compare the amount of group information for each group in the original text to that in the summary. If information about a group is consistently reduced more or increased less than other groups, this indicates content bias in the summarizer. In our analysis, we consider nine groups from three categories: men and women for gender; Black, White, Hispanic, and Asian for race/ethnicity; and Islam, Christianity, and Judaism for religion. To fully explore the effect of different combinations of groups, we use GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) to 3 generate a synthetic corpus of articles designed to contain different ratios of information for group pairs from each category. We describe our methods for measuring the amount of group information in a text in the following subsections. Full methods for generating our synthetic corpus can be found in Appendix B Group Association Scores In order to measure underrepresentation bias, we must ﬁrst be able to measure how much information about a group is present. While this could be done using a keyword counting approach by creating lists of words corresponding to each group and quantifying the group information as the number of words from each list that appear in a text, this is likely to miss information as it is not feasible to specify every word related to a group. Instead, inspired by work measuring bias in static embeddings (Caliskan et al., 2017; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Garg et al., 2018), we measure the group membership of each word in a text by generating its embedding using a word2vec model (Mikolov et al., 2013) and measuring its average cosine similarity to group word lists from Garg et al. (2018); Bertrand & Mullainathan (2004); Manzini et al. (2019). After we have these scores, we aggregate the scores to obtain a text-wide measure of association with each group. We refer to this as a group association score, or A , and it is calculated as follows: Where T is the text, g is the group, S ( t, g ) is the average cosine similarity between token t and group g , and α i is the cosine similarity threshold for group i above which we consider words to have a strong similarity to the group g 5 . As it is highly unlikely that words belonging to some POS will have a true relation to a group, we use different POS ﬁlters to calculate these association scores depending on the group category. For gender, we calculate the scores only for pronouns and nouns and for race/ethnicity and religion we use nouns and adjectives. For each group, we calculate the representation score , R ( T, g ) as relative proximity to the group with the maximum difference association score in the text: This means that for a group with score 0 . 4 over a set of texts, we would expect to see 40% the information about that group vs. the group each article is about. Unbiased summarizers should produce summaries with roughly the same proximity scores for each group as the article. If these scores decrease for a group after summarization, this indicates an underrepresentation bias toward that group. Likewise, if these scores increase for a group, this indicates a tendency to overrepresent this group.

3.2 P OSITION B IAS A NALYSIS

 If information given at the end of an article is moved to the beginning, is it more likely to appear in the summary? As it is impossible to write about two different things in the same space, if there are multiple groups mentioned in an article, one must appear ﬁrst. If summarizers show a bias for picking earlier or later information, this may also pose a fairness problem towards different groups. It has been found that reference summaries and some automatically generated summaries for news articles show a bias for information that appears near the beginning of the articles Jung et al. (2019). However, it is not known if this pattern holds for more recent summarization algorithms, nor if the amount of position bias between human and automatic summarization is comparable. Our goal is to measure the amount of position bias in reference summaries to that shown by each summarizer to see if this existing bias is ampliﬁed through the use of automatic summarization. To do this, we compare the distribution of sentence locations between automatically generated summaries and reference summaries to measure any differences. 5 For a description of how we calculate these thresholds, see the Appendix C.3. 4 Because we examine abstractive and extractive summaries, we cannot measure where each summary sentence is from through exact matching. Instead, we create TF-IDF vectors of each sentence in the article and summary and compute the cosine similarity between each, marking article sentences with high similarities as being present in the summary.

3.3 P HRASING B IAS A NALYSIS

 Given a paraphrased version of an article, do summaries still include the same information in their summaries? While we could expect a human to generate a summary including the same information regardless of how it is phrased, we do not know if this is the case for automatic summarization. A summarizer that is sensitive to the phrasing of sentences may generate drastically different sum- maries of an article and a paraphrased version of that article. Fragility of this kind is highly undesir- able. For one thing, it is highly unintuitive to human authors. If one article contains the exact same information as another, we expect that their summaries should also contain the same information, regardless of article phrasing. But additionally, sensitivity to phrasing could lead to ampliﬁed con- tent bias. Imagine an author who consistently uses a certain phrase in sentences about one group and a summarizer that never chooses sentences with this phrasing. This summarizer would then unfairly exclude information about this group due to its sensitivity to phrasing. We perform two paraphrasing experiments to measure the sensitivity of each summarizer to sentence phrasing: one targeted version and one random version. In the targeted version, we paraphrase the article sentences that originally appear in the generated summary. In the untargeted version, we paraphrase a random 10% of sentences in the article. We compare the sentencees that appear in the original summary to those that appear in the newly generated summaries. If the summarizers are sensitive to sentence phrasing, we should observe lots of changes in the sentences selected for the original summary and the summary after paraphrasing.

4 R ESULTS

 The results of our experiments show that automatic summarization is sensitive to the structure of articles, as well as, to some degree, the groups discussed in the articles. Additionally, when com- pared to the reference summaries and the original articles, machine learning based summarization algorithms show a tendency of exacerbating the position bias shown by the reference summaries. Due to space constraints, we report only our results for gender. However, our results hold for other groups as well, and are presented in the appendix.

4.1 C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS

 We summarize articles comprised of half sentences from articles about men and half about women. We ﬁnd that all machine-learning based algorithms show a large sensitivity to the ordering of the information in the text, suggesting a position bias, which we explore further in Section 4.2. As shown in Fig. 1, almost all machine-learning based summarizers show a strong preference for sen- tences about the group that appears ﬁrst in the article. Even though there are an equal number of sentences in each article about men and women, these summarizers show a tendency to amplify in- formation that appears earlier in the article and surpress information that comes later. GPT-3 is the exception, showing an opposite, but much stronger tendency. It prioritizes information that appears later in, while information appearing earlier is ignored. In addition, controlling for ordering, GPT-3 surpresses information about women more than information about men. When we repeat the experiment with imbalanced articles, these patterns continue. As shown in Fig. 2a, in articles that begin with 90% sentences about men and end with 10% about women, all machine learning based models except GPT-3 consistently maintain or increase the men’s represen- tation scores while decreasing those of women, indicating a preference for information about men. However, when this order is reversed, this pattern follows suit Fig. 2b. Despite the small ratio of sentences about women present in the summaries, it is still ampliﬁed if it occurs in the preferred location in the article. To see if all of the bias is due to location, we summarize articles about only men and women and measure if ampliﬁcation/supression still occurs. As shown in Fig. 3b, we observe that for articles 5 R e p r e s e n t a ti on s c o r e about men, no signiﬁcant changes occur for either group. In contrast, in summaries of articles about women, the extractive summarizers maintain this pattern, but the abstractive summarizers show a tendency to underrepresent women and overrepresent men in their summaries, particularly when allowed to write longer summaries given more space to generate summaries, with BART and GPT-3 making signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 05 ) changes to the representation scores of men and women. Overall, t hese results show a pattern of unpredictability and fragility in machine learning based summarization algorithms, which seem to depend more on the ordering than the presence of infor- mation. While some ML based summarizers are more susceptible to this than others (e.g., GPT-3), all exhibit similar tendencies. 6 t e x t r a nk az u r e b a r t p e g a s u s gp t 3 0 0 . 5 1 R e p r e s e n t a ti on S c o r e (a) Articles about women t e x t r a nk az u r e b a r t p e g a s u s gp t 3 Women Men

4.2 P OSITION B IAS A NALYSIS

 The pattern we observed in Section 4.1 for summaries on our synthetic corpus also holds for sum- maries of real articles from CNN/DailyMail. All summarizers except GPT-3 show a preference for sentences that appear close to the start of articles. This preference exists in the reference summaries as well, however, it is clearly ampliﬁed by MatchSum, PreSumm, and Azure, as shown in Fig. 4b 6 (all machine learning based abstractive models), which select sentences from the start of articles more often and almost never select sentences from the end of articles. In contrast, GPT-3 selects sentences from the start of articles less often, and selects sentences from the end at a signiﬁcantly higher rate than the reference summaries Fig. 4c. These inconsistencies show marked differences between human and automatic text summarization, and, in combination with the content bias results shown in Section 4.1, suggest that machine learning based summarizers may be learning more about where to select information from and less about what information to select.

4.3 P ARAPHRASING A NALYSIS

 Our paraphrasing analysis shows that summarizers are sensitive to the structure of the articles they summarize. Speciﬁcally, however, they are sensitive to changes in the structure of sentences that would have appeared in the original summary. As shown in Fig. 5a, when the sentences chosen for paraphrasing are those that appear in the summary of the un-paraphrased article, the likelihood that the summary will remain the same is quite low. However, when a similar amount of random sentences are paraphrased in the untargeted version, often the summary of the paraphrased article uses the same sentences as the un-paraphrased version, as Fig. 5b illustrates. This demonstrates that 6 Consult Appendix E for all ﬁgures 7 summarizers are highly sensitive to the paraphrasing of sentences that they rank as highly important, showing a structure bias. 0 0 . 5 1 T e x t R a nk M a t c h S u m P r e S u mm E x t A z u r e P E GA S U S B A R T O v e r l a p 0 0 . 5 1 T e x t R a nk M a t c h S u m P r e S u mm E x t A z u r e P E GA S U S B A R T

5 L IMITATIONS

 Synthetic Data Using news articles to study the content bias of summarizers comes with a number of challenges. First, news articles are not always about speciﬁc groups. Additionally, some com- binations of groups show up very rarely, making it impossible to get data about them. Ideally, we would modify the amount of information present for each group to measure how much summarizers prioritize some groups over others. Using synthetic data gives us the ﬂexibility to limit the groups present in an article or combine different amounts of information about speciﬁc groups to measure the impact of both group and amount of information on generated summaries. Types of Bias We are limited to exploring types of bias that can be reliably detected using com- putational methods. This ignores many more subtle types of bias, such as misrepresentation, which are no less important for not being included in our analysis. This is not intended as an exhaustive study of the types of bias that can occur in automatic summaries. Rather, it is an initial exploration which we hope will inspire others to consider the bias summarization systems may introduce. Other types of bias, such as framing bias would be best explored using manual linguistic analysis, and this is a line of future research we strongly encourage. We recognize that there is a margin for error in all our analyses, as we rely on automated methods. We conduct manual analysis on a randomly selected subset of the articles we analyze for each analysis to check our results, and ﬁnd our scores align with human judgements.

6 R ELATED W ORK

 To best understand our work, it is important to have an understanding of automatic summarization itself, as well as linguistic and NLP methods for measuring bias, and prior work analyzing various types of bias present in automatic summarization. Summarization Methods There are two methods of automatic summarization: extractive and ab- stractive. In extractive summarization, an articles’ sentences are ranked according to some algorithm and the top k are chosen as the summary of the text. We study the extractive models TextRank (Mi- halcea & Tarau, 2004), which is based on the PageRank algorithm, along with PreSumm (Liu & Lapata, 2019) and MatchSum (Zhong et al., 2020), which use embeddings and neural networks to score and select sentences for a summary. 8 In abstractive summarization, the summarization model generates every word of the summary itself rather than taking from the article directly (though some models, notably Pointer-generator (See et al., 2017), do have mechanisms to directly copy). As these models are generative, they generally rely on neural nets using typical encoder-decoder architecture. Examples of models that have been used for abstractive summarization include PreSummAbs (Liu & Lapata, 2019), the abstractive ver- sion of PreSumm, the language model BART (Lewis et al., 2019), and PEGASUS (Zhang et al., 2020), a language model designed by Google with summarization in mind. All of these models have obtained SOTA performance at some time or another for summarization on the CNN/DailyMail (See et al., 2017; Hermann et al., 2015) dataset. Linguistic and NLP measures for bias There have been various studies and measures of bias in NLP, notably in word, both quantifying the bias in embeddings (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Caliskan et al., 2017) and using embeddings to measure the bias in human text (Garg et al., 2018). Closely related to our work, Dacon & Liu (2021) measure gender bias in news article abstracts using a variety of computational techniques, ﬁnding that they are overwhelmingly biased against women. In linguistics, studies of bias generally use a combination of lexical analysis and discourse analy- sis to measure how members of different groups talk, how they are talked about , and often what stereotypes exist around both (Mendoza-Denton, 2014; Baker, 2012; Fairclough, 2013). Automated analysis restricts our ability to use techniques that rely on more qualitative analysis, but we draw inspiration from them in our deﬁnitions of bias and our experiments. Properties of Automatic Summarization Dash et al. (2019) explore a related topic to this paper, measuring fairness in automatically generated tweet collections by user demographic, ﬁnding that existing extractive methods exhibit bias toward tweets written by different groups, dependent on the corpus used. Keswani & Celis (2021) perform a similar line of work, exploring dialect diversity in Twitter summaries and ﬁnding that summarizers prefer tweets in Standard American English (SAE) over other dialects. Jung et al. (2019) ﬁnd that, for news articles, human summaries tend to select information from near the start of articles. Additionally, they show that various summarization algorithms place great im- portance on the position of information. Lee et al. (2022) measure and attempt to mitigate political framing bias in summaries of news articles by encouraging the generation of summaries that syn- thesize political views from a variety of sources. This relates to work from Sharevski et al. (2021) who show it’s possible to adversarially bias a summarizers toward writing in a particular political writing style. Finally, Jørgensen & Søgaard (2021) explore possible bias in summary evaluation by conducting a pilot study exploring how user demographic relates to perception of summaries. Their results show that generated summaries are most strongly preferred by older White men, while other demographics rank them more poorly.

7 C ONCLUSION

 In this paper we have shown that machine learning based summarization algorithms demon- strate bias toward under-represented groups and are highly sensitive to article structure . What groups are mentioned, where information appears in the article, and how important sentences are phrased all have large effects on the generated summaries. All of these exhibited biases have potential to cause harm. Readers rely on summaries to accurately represent a longer text, and if a summarizer systematically introduces position, sentiment, or content bias this risks both mis-representing the original text and biasing the reader. Although this bias is not intentionally designed into these algorithms, it should be tested and corrected for in future summarization algorithms. Especially as automatic summarization is marketed more and more as both a commercial and personal-use tool, it is important to measure and correct the bias in these systems before deploying them. While a summarizer may obtain a high ROUGE score, this does not necessarily mean that the summaries produced will fairly reﬂect the articles they represent. They may be biased in how they refer to certain groups, in the sentiment they use, or in terms of the article structure they favor. We recommend that more bias evaluation methods, like the ones used in this paper, be used when evaluating new summarizers to avoid creating unintentionally biased summarizers in the future. 9

8 E THICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

 Any study of bias inherently carries ethical considerations. A summary that ampliﬁes bias already present in the original article or generates new bias has potential to cause harm. Especially as automatic summarization is marketed more and more as both a commercial and personal-use tool, it is important to explore the problems this could create. Sharevski et al. (2021) have shown that it is possible to bias a summary to a speciﬁc political ideology, and our work has shown that even without modiﬁcation, different summarizers treat groups differently and are sensitive to changes in article format. This raises concerns about summarization that should be kept in mind when designing and evaluating models in the future. In our analysis we consider only one corpus, which contains writing with a relatively uniform writing style, and is written in Standard American English. This does not allow us to explore bias in language style or dialect, which is another possible axis of bias in summarizers. Our motivation for using embedding similarity scores to measure group membership is to allow for ﬂexibility that wordlists cannot provide. As word embeddings have been shown to encode factual information, using these scores is a good way to achieve this. However, these scores have also been shown to encode human biases and stereotypes, which we found to be true in our analysis as well. For example “terror” was the most associated word with the category “Islam” in some examples. While in some cases articles may actually be using these words with stereotypical associations to refer to groups, this is not always the case, and could introduce some amount of error. Based on our observations, this risk is small, but does represent a possible limitation.

9 R EPRODUCIBILITY

 We provide all code used to perform our analysis, along with the GPT-2 generated corpus. Full details for both how we generated this synthetic corpus, and how we performed our analyses are provided in our appendix. All other data and models are publicly available and we do not modify them. Though some of the models we use exhibit randomness in the summaries they generate, we have run sufﬁcient experiments that were are conﬁdent our results could be reproduced.

R EFERENCES

 Paul Baker 10 11

A T YPES AND E XAMPLES OF CONTENT BIAS

 12 Including more about one group than another relative to the ratio in the original text The women’s team scored very high in the competition. They practiced for many months to get here and it paid off. Their scores set a new record. ... The men’s team did pretty well too. They beat a few other teams. The women’s team scored very high in the competition. The men’s team did pretty well too. They beat a few other teams. Inclusion/exclusion In/excluding a detail only when a speciﬁc group is involved Both the women’s and men’s ﬁgure skating teams are headed to the Beijing olympics. They will compete throughout February. Both are expected to win lots of medals. ... We’ve gotten a chance to see their costumes early. The women’s costumes are very pretty. The men’s costumes are also very good. Both the women’s and men’s ﬁgure skating teams are headed to the Beijing olympics. Both are expected to win lots of medals. The women’s costumes were very pretty. Inaccuracy Including information in a way that inac- curately reports infor- mation or hallucinat- ing inaccurate infor- mation (for abstractive models) about a spe- ciﬁc group What to do if some- one’s having a seizure: Move them to a safe position. Roll them to their side. .... It’s also important to know what not do to do. Here’s a list of things not to do if someone’s having a seizure: Hold them down. Put some- thing in their mouth. What to do if some- one’s having a seizure: Hold them down. Put something in their mouth. Continued on next page 13 sentences for one group than another Two common pet choices are dogs and cats. One may be better than the other depending on your lifestyle. Dogs are very loving and make great pets. Dogs re- quire a lot of attention and care and need to be walked every day. Cats can be very affectionate and are great pets. Cleaning up after cats is also a lot of work. Two common pet choices are dogs and cats. Dogs require a lot of attention and care and need to be walked every day. Cats can be very affectionate and are great pets. Using different sen- tence structure to frame a situation when one group is involved vs another A police ofﬁcer fatally shot a man at 8pm last night. ... An ofﬁcer’s gun discharged, killing the man and injuring another last night. An ofﬁcer’s gun dis- charged, killing the man and injuring an- other last night. 14

B S YNTHETIC C ORPUS G ENERATION

 We generate a synthetic corpus of articles using GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019) and prompts from the BOLD dataset (Dhamala et al., 2021) for each group 7 . We refer to these articles as single-group arti- cles, as they are prompted to generate articles about each group. We also create multi-group articles by sampling different amounts of contiguous sentences from single-group articles and combining them to form a new article with information about two groups. We generate multi-group articles for each combination of two groups within each of our three group categories, constructing one version with the ﬁrst group at the beginning of the article, and another with this group at the end of the article (using the same sentences). This allows us to explore the effect of different group combinations and amounts of information while controlling for the importance of the order information appears in.

C C ONTENT B IAS A NALYSIS D ETAILS C.1 W ORD L ISTS

 We use lists of representative keywords for each of the nine groups we study. These lists are used for both ﬁltering articles and the group analysis we perform using word embeddings. The lists for the male, female, Hispanic, Asian, Islam, and Christianity groups are taken from Garg et al. (2018) with some minor changes made to better suit the corpus. For example, we remove the word ”cross” from the Christian word list as it is often used outside the context of Christianity in our corpus. We use the same lists as Caliskan et al. (2017) for the White and Black group lists (originally from Bertrand & Mullainathan (2004)), which uses ﬁrst names rather than last names as done for the other racial groups. This is because, as Garg et al. (2018) describe, there is a very large overlap in the typical last names of white and Black people in the US, owing in large part to the country’s history of slavery. For the Jewish group, we use the list used by Manzini et al. (2019).

C.2 G ROUP S IMILARITY S CORES

 We generate embeddings using a word2vec model (Mikolov et al., 2013) pre-trained on the Google News corpus. Before measuring similarity, we tokenize and POS tag each document with NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) and the universal tagset (Petrov et al., 2012) (this allows us to ﬁlter words by POS, which we explain further in Section 3.1). Then, we measure the group similarity for each token embedding, t in the text as follows: Where G i is i th set of group keywords, and s ( t, g ) is the cosine similarity between the two token embeddings. We collect these scores for each word in both the original article and its summary and aggregate them into text association scores, described below. We observed that, though these scores serve as a good indicator of the groups present in an article, they can be quite noisy for words with low scores. This noise comes as a result of many words in each article having a baseline similarity to people (something all the groups have in common) and results in the majority of words in an article receiving quite low scores, while the minority, most indicative of group presence in the text, receive very high scores. Therefore we focus on only the high scoring words to determine group membership and discard lower scores as uninformative.

C.3 T HRESHOLDS

 The thresholds used to determine high scoring words were calculated using similarities of each group list to the other group lists. For each group, we take the median similarity of the most similar alternate group to be the threshold above which we consider words important. In practice, we ﬁnd 7 For detailed information on generation parameters, see the appendix. 15 that this reduces the number of words that really belong to one group that are given falsely high association scores for other groups.

C.4 A RTICLE F ILTERING

 As an additional ﬁlter, we restrict our analysis to articles that contain at least one word from at least one of our group keyword sets. This is to ensure that at least one group is truly present in the article, and does not signiﬁcantly reduce the number of articles we are examining (the original CNN DM dataset is 311,971 articles, and with this ﬁlter, we analyze 296,460 articles). We recognize that bias could still be present if a group is not explicitly mentioned; our group keywords are not all encom- passing and there are many implicit ways to signal group information (e.g., dog-whistling Haney- L´opez (2014)). However, manual linguistic analysis is far more suited for exploring this type of bias, and we ﬁnd that this ﬁltering makes our analysis more reliable.

D P ARAPHRASING A NALYSIS D ETAILS

 We use the pre-trained PEGASUS paraphraser 8 from HuggingFace (Wolf et al., 2019) for these experiments and run the analysis on the test split of CNN/DailyMail (˜11k articles). We create ﬁve versions of each paraphrased article in order to measure the effect of different paraphrases on which sentences are selected for an article.

E A DDITIONAL L OCATION A NALYSIS P LOTS

 8 https://huggingface.co/tuner007/pegasus paraphrase 16 17

F A DDITIONAL G ROUP A NALYSIS R ESULTS F.1 M ULTI

 - GROUP

,

 RELIGION nk mm m gp 3 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 I n f o r m a ti on r a ti o nk mm m

F.2 R ECURSIVE S UMMARIZATION

 Here we observe similar patterns to that seen in single group summarization. Abstractive summa- rizers show a tendency to ﬁrst gain, then lose information about men for articles about women, and lose and then gain information about women. However, for articles about men, the amount of information about both groups stays relatively constant across all steps of summarization. 18 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 0 . 5 1 Step I n f o r m a ti on r a ti o Women Men 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 0 . 5 1 Step I n f o r m a ti on r a ti o Women 19