

I MPROVING L ANGUAGE M ODEL P RETRAINING WITH T EXT S TRUCTURE I NFORMATION

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review A BSTRACT Inter-sentence pretraining tasks learn from sentence relationships and facilitate high-level language understanding that cannot be directly learned in word-level pretraining tasks. However, we have found experimentally that existing inter- sentence methods for general-purpose language pretraining improve performance only at a relatively small scale but not at larger scales. For an alternative

, we

 propose Text Structure Prediction (TSP), a more sophisticated inter-sentence task that uses text structure to provide more abundant self-supervised learning signals to pretraining models at larger scales

.

 TSP classifies sentence pairs over six de- signed text structure relationships and it can be seen as an implicit form of learning high

-

 level language understanding

by identifying key

 concepts

and relationships in

 texts

. Experiments

 show that

TSP

 provides improved performance on language understanding tasks for models

at

 various scales. Our approach thus serves as an initial attempt

to

 demonstrate that the exploitation of text structure can facilitate language understanding.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 General-purpose pretrained language models have been widely applied in natural language process- ing (NLP). The most representative model of these models is BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), which is pretrained simultaneously on two pretraining tasks: a masked language model (MLM) task, and a next sentence prediction (NSP) task. While MLM masks words and requires models to fill clozes, NSP is an inter-sentence task of predicting whether two texts are continuous. Inter-sentence tasks learn relationships between sentences and facilitate high-level language understanding that is not directly learned by word-level pretraining tasks (Devlin et al., 2019). However, the representative inter-sentence task, NSP, has been found to fail to improve performance (Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019). Although a few successors of NSP have been proposed, they are still not widely adopted and researched. In this paper, we show that the existing inter-sentence methods for general-purpose language pretraining are actually suboptimal; to improve on those methods’ weaknesses, we then propose an alternative that redefines what is learned from sentence relations. The existing general-purpose inter-sentence pretraining tasks include NSP (Devlin et al., 2019), which discriminates whether two texts come from different documents; sentence order prediction (SOP) (Lan et al., 2020), which discriminates whether two texts are swapped; and sentence structure objective (SSO) (Wang et al., 2020), which discriminates whether two texts come from different documents or are swapped. To investigate claims of improved performance, we experimented these methods at three different scales ( Small , Base , and Large ), which mainly followed the setting of BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). The model size and the amount of consumed data increased from Small to Base and then to Large scale (see Appendix A for the details). As seen in Figure 1, our experimental results show that the existing methods improved performance only at the Small -scale whereas they undermined or failed to improve performance for models at larger scales. In investigating the reason for little improvement by the existing methods at larger scales, we noticed that all of the aforementioned methods split an input text into two segments and learn from only the relationship between the two segments, thus ignoring the text’s underlying structure. As illustrated in Figure 2, text structure can be seen as the organization of information in texts. Without text struc- ture, a text becomes a long continuous word sequence, which is hard to read and makes it difficult to identify key concepts and logical relationships. This suggests that text structure information, which 1 S upe r G L U E 58 61 64 67 70 73 76 79 Small Base Large MLM MLM + NSP MLM + SOP MLM + SSO MML + TSP . The game resolves around Qubits, the basic building block of a quantum computer. It's pretty straightforward (you won't need to learn any quantum entanglement math or physics) with the goal of increasing the number of Qubits while keeping them cool. The more Qubits you have, the more difficult it gets. Eventually, you'll "discover new upgrades, complete big research projects and hopefully become a little more curious about how we're building quantum computers," wrote Google Quantum head of education Abe Asfaw. The goal is to draw attention to quantum computing, because it seems there's a dearth of people working in the field. To that end, Google is bringing the game to the classroom, hoping to encourage educators to talk about the subject and expand access to quantum computing research. "We need more students pursuing careers building or using quantum computers, and understanding what it would be like to be a quantum scientist or engineer," wrote Asfaw. "For me, that’s what World Quantum Day is all about: showing everyone what quantum computing really is and how they can get involved." . ) Google's intention behind the game. Paragraph IV (2 sentences) The meaning of World Quantum Day. World Quantum Day was apparently yesterday, and Google feted the occasion with the launch of The Qubit Game, as spotted by 9to5Google. Created in partnership with Doublespeak games, it's a “playful journey to building a quantum computer, one qubit at a time," Google said. It also hopes the game, and World Quantum Day, will help generate some interest in the field. Further describe Conclude Explain the reason contains clues for humans to discern key concepts and relationships in texts, can also provide abun- dant learning signals for models to facilitate language understanding. That is, integration of such text structure information into an inter-sentence task may make the task more informative for larger models. Hence, our goal in this paper is to demonstrate that tasks for learning from text structure 2 can improve general-purpose language model pretraining. This goal motivated us to propose a new inter-sentence task to make better use of text structure information. The proposed task, Text Structure Prediction (TSP), is our initial attempt to integrate text struc- ture information into general-purpose language pretraining. Regarding the task design, we view text structure in terms of two axes: ordering and hierarchy. Hierarchies are nested groupings of sentences, such as paragraphs or sections, where each group conveys a specific concept and its su- perordinate group conveys a more global concept. The order of sentences represents the flow of context and connections between information such as chronological process or cause-effect rela- tionship (Danes, 2015). Thus, the solution of the TSP task requires two abilities: understanding of the semantics of sentences to group them into nested concepts (reflected by hierarchical relation- ships), and identification of connective relations between them (reflected by ordering relationships). Specifically, we propose six inter-sentence relations for learning from text structure information, which combine three hierarchical levels and two ordering directions. As a result, the TSP task re- quires a model to classify sentence pairs over the six defined text structure relationships. More details of TSP are given in Section 3. Through experiments we have shown the following: (1) Our proposed method continues to improve performance on a language understanding benchmark at the Small , Base , and Large scales, whereas the inter-sentence baselines fail to do so. (2) Our proposed method is comparable to or better than the baselines on almost all language understanding tasks in the benchmarks. Accordingly, the results have shown the effectiveness and potential of exploiting text structure information for general-purpose language pretraining. In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows 1. We find that existing inter-sentence tasks for general-purpose language pretraining did not bring significant improvement in our settings. In our experiments, these approaches per- form well at a relatively small scale, but fail to improve or even degrade performance at larger scales. 2. We propose the use of text structure information to provide more valuable learning signals for general-purpose language pretraining. For our initial attempt at this, we designed the Text Structure Prediction (TSP) task and show that TSP improves performance at all scales in our experiments. We thus demonstrate that the exploitation of text structure information is a promising research direction for facilitating general-purpose language understanding.

2 R ELATED W ORK 2.1 W ORD -L EVEL P RETRAINING

 Self-supervised learning of word representation has rapidly developed in the past several years. GPT (Radford et al., 2018) predicts the next token with the information for each token coming from its previous tokens. ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) uses a bidirectional framework to produce contextu- alized word representations by fusing the final hidden states of two LSTM networks processing information in different directions. BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) achieves deep bidirectional pre- training via the MLM task, which masks certain words in the input sequence and then predicts the masked words. Since the success of BERT, transfer learning has become mainstream in NLP. Many research initialize their models with the parameters of pre-trained models to reuse and finetune the representations for their target tasks. With the wide adoption of word-level pretrained models, the development of word-level pretraining tasks has also become prosperous. For example, ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020) detects replaced tokens that come from incorrect predictions by another MLM model, while PMI-Masking (Levine et al., 2021) samples and masks collocations instead of words. Our proposed approach is learned simultaneously with a word-level pretraining task, and it can be easily combined with any word-level pretraining task that is based on transformer encoders, with negligible additional computational and memory costs.

2.2 S ENTENCE -L EVEL P RETRAINING

 Approaches for learning sentence representations mainly fall into three categories. The first type, in- cluding Skip-Thought (Kiros et al., 2015) and CMLM (Yang et al., 2021), aims to generate sentence representations that are useful for word prediction objectives. The second type, including SimCSE 3 (Gao et al., 2021), is contrastive learning, which makes representations of positive sentence pairs closer and vice versa. The third type entails inter-sentence objectives that learn sentence represen- tations by capturing relationships between sentences; this type includes NSP and SOP as described in Section 1. While the first two approaches focus on representations of single and independent sen- tences, only the inter-sentence approach considers the interactions and contextualization between sentences. Our proposed approach also belongs to the inter-sentence category.

2.3 I NTER -S ENTENCE T ASKS

 In terms of the kinds of sentence relationships to be learned, most inter-sentence tasks are sentence ordering tasks that rearrange a set of sentences into their original order (Cui et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2020), whereas our proposed sentence relationships (Section 3.2) include ordering relationships but are not restricted to them. Regarding the creation of sentence representations, instead of encoding each sentence individually (Prabhumoye et al., 2020), our proposed framework (Section 3.1) adopts an approach of concatenating sentences into an input sequence, whereby information flows across sentences; thus, the created sentence representations are contextualized. In terms of semantic units, approaches such as NSP and SOP capture relationships between segments that are two halves of a text sequence that may include many sentences. In contrast, our approach processes sentences as in many other approaches. Finally, for task objectives, some approaches aim to identify coherent text (Barzilay & Lapata, 2008; Mesgar & Strube, 2018) or learning discourse representations (Iter et al., 2020), whereas our baselines (NSP, SOP, SSO) and our proposed method are for creating general-purpose language models.

3 P ROPOSED M ETHOD

 We explain our proposed method in two parts. Section 3.1 introduces the overall proposed frame- work for creating sentence embeddings and then performing six-class classification over sentence pairs using created sentence embeddings. Figure 3 shows an overview of this framework. Sec- tion 3.2 further elaborates on the six inter-sentence relationships that we designed for classification and learning over sentence pairs. Overall, the implementation of TSP comes with several advan- tages: (1) It is a self-supervised task that does not require external resources or human labeling. (2) It can easily be combined with any pretraining task that outputs contextual word representations. An example is provided in Appendix E. (3) It can be learned concurrently with other tasks in one for- ward pass. (4) It only requires constructing an output head on top of a text encoder, with negligible extra parameters and computations.

3.1 P ROPOSED F RAMEWORK 3.1.1 I NPUT SEQUENCE

 Given a text sequence, we mark the scope of each sentence in the sequence by using the NLTK toolkit (Bird et al., 2009). The result is an sequence that can be described as x = < x 1 , 1 , x 1 , 2 , ..., x 1 ,n 1 , ..., x k, 1 , x k, 2 , ..., x k,n k > , where x i,t is the t -th token in sentence i , n i is the length of sentence i , and k is the number of sentences in x . Next, the sequence’s sentences are shuffled to enable the model to learn to identify their correct order. We have found that shuffling all of a sequence’s sentences introduces noise into the model; thus, we shuffle only a limited percentage of the sentences (15% in this work, as explained in Appendix C), while keeping the other sentences at their original positions. Additionally, to learn simultaneously from the MLM task, we follow the same procedure used in BERT to corrupt the sequence: 15% tokens are selected; then, 80% of them are replaced with a [MASK] token, 10% are replaced with random tokens, and 10% are unchanged. Finally, we add sentinel tokens [CLS] and [SEP] to the sequence as in BERT, and a masked and partially shuffled input sequence is thus obtained for the model.

3.1.2 S ENTENCE EMBEDDING

 To obtain sentence representations, we first calculate contextualized token hidden states: 4 Figure where f θ is the transformer encoder function and x ′ is a corrupted and partially shuffled input token sequence. By averaging the hidden state vectors of tokens that belong to the sentence, we obtain its sentence embedding: where h i,t is the hidden state vector of the t -th token in the i -th sentence and n i is the length of the i -th sentence. Additionally, through the transformer encoder’s attention mechanism, each token interacts with all tokens in the input sequence rather than only the tokens in the sentence it belongs to. As a result, the sentence embeddings are contextualized and aware of other sentences in the same sequence.

3.1.3 P AIRWISE CLASSIFICATION

 Next, we perform six-class classification over sentence pairs to learn the text structure relationship between sentences. Given a pair of sentences, we pass their sentence embeddings to a classifier to obtain prediction logits z i,j = W 2 ( GELU ( W 1 ( s i ⊕ s j ))) . ⊕ denotes vector concatenation, s k is the embedding of the k -th sentence, and GELU is the activation function proposed by Hendrycks & Gimpel (2016). Finally, the loss in the Text Structure Prediction (TSP) task is the cross-entropy loss: where y i,j is the correct label for the relationship between the i -th and j -th sentences, and z i,j,c is the c -th element of the logit vector for the sentence pair. The final TSP loss L tsp is the average over the TSP losses for all sentence pairs in a mini-batch, where the sentences in each sentence pair are in the same sequence. Overall, a model is optimized by minimizing the sum of MLM loss L mlm and our TSP loss L tsp :

3.2 P ROPOSED T EXT S TRUCTURE R ELATIONSHIPS

 The key part of the training objective is our design of six classes to represent six text structure relationships between sentences. As illustrated on the right in Figure 4, these relationships are the set of combination of three hierarchical relationships { neighbor, same paragraph, same document } and two ordering relationships { normal order, reverse order } . Concretely, these relationships are defined as follows. The hierarchical relationships include (1) neighbor (two sentences are adjacent), (2) same paragraph (two sentences are in the same paragraph but not adjacent), and (3) same document (two sentences are in the same document but not adjacent or in the same paragraph). The ordering 5 Text Structure Prediction (TSP) Sentence Order Prediction (SOP) Next Sentence Prediction (NSP) By comparing the defined relations, we can see that TSP takes better advantage of the text structure and is a more complex task that is expected to provide more valuable knowledge. relationships include (1) normal order (two sentences are in the forward order), and (2) reversed order (two sentences are in the reversed order).

3.3 L EARNING E XPECTATION FROM H IERARCHY AND O RDER

 The hierarchy of a text structure can be described in terms of nested groupings of sentences, where the groupings correspond to natural document structures (e.g., paragraphs, sections, etc.). As each hierarchical group conveys a specific concept via the sentences it includes, a sentence should include a clue for a local concept in a lower-level group as well as a clue for a global concept in a higher- level group. A model needs to learn to identify many concepts at different levels of granularity in a text sequence and to construct a hierarchy of sentences based on semantic clues in the sentences. This can facilitate understanding of context at different hierarchical levels. The order of sentences depends on the logical relations that connect the different concepts described in the sentences. These relations can be chronological relations, cause-effect relations, and so on. Textual coherence is also an important clue for sentence order. A model must recognize relations between concepts and identify coherence to rearrange the order of sentences. Moreover, learning from sentence order has long been shown to be useful for many downstream applications (Cui et al., 2020).

4 E XPERIMENTS 4.1 S ETUP 4.1.1 P RETRAINING

 All models in this paper were pretrained on OpenWebText (Gokaslan & Cohen, 2019), an open- source recreation of the WebText corpus described in GPT2 (Radford et al., 2019). It includes 38GB of texts from 8,013,769 documents extracted from Reddit posts. Note that we did not use Wikipedia+BookCorpus because of the public unavailability of official BookCorpus (Zhu et al., 6 2015). In preprocessing the pretraining data, we delimited paragraphs by blank lines and marked the scopes of sentences with the sentence splitter of NLTK (Bird et al., 2009) for the use of TSP. For this paper, we experimented with pretraining models on word-based MLM with different inter- sentence tasks or on MLM only. In particular, we mainly followed BERT’s pretraining setting and referred to the setting of ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), another popular pre-trained model. We trained with a sequence length of 512 and 1 million training steps at the Base and Large scales, or with a length of 128 and 1.45 million steps at the Small scale. The batch sizes vary with the scale, as described along with other details in Appendix A. To ensure fair comparisons, all models at the same scale had almost the same computational cost and number of parameters in both training and inference. Note that we did not perform any hyperparameter search, although we think it could help our proposed method to perform better.

4.1.2 E VALUATION

 Our pretrained models were evaluated on the widely adopted SuperGLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2019) for evaluating general language understanding systems. SuperGLUE contains tasks cover- ing natural language inference (RTE, CB), multiple-choice reasoning (COPA), question-answering (BoolQ, MultiRC, ReCoRD), and word sense disambiguation (WiC). The metrics used here for these tasks are the same as those the ones described in the SuperGLUE paper. Because some of the evaluation datasets are small and the scores on them could vary substantially depending on the random seed, we followed the ELECTRA setting and finetuned 10 runs for each task from the same pretrained checkpoint for every model. Here, we took the median score of 10 runs for our development set results (Appendix D), and we used the best-performing model on the development set for evaluation on the test set. In contrast to certain related papers, we did not apply tricks such as intermediate finetuning or ensembling during the stage of finetuning. Similarly, we excluded the WSC task because it involves intermediate finetuning and publicly unavailable training data to obtain decent results (Kocijan et al., 2019). More details about our finetuning are given in Appendix B.

4.2 R ESULTS

 Table 1 lists the averaged SuperGLUE scores. TSP improved on pure MLM and outperformed the inter-sentence baselines at all scales. These results show the effectiveness and potential of incor- porating text structure information into learning. The results also reveal two findings. First, NSP undermined or made little difference in the performance, which matches the claims of Liu et al. (2019); Yang et al. (2019). Second, while SOP has been claimed to improve NSP on the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018; Lan et al., 2020), we found that it failed to outperform NSP in our experiment. Next, we analyze the scaling of the four inter-sentence tasks. Although the inter-sentence baselines (NSP, SOP, and SSO) improved on pure MLM at the Small scale, at the larger scales they failed to improve on pure MLM by a significant margin or even undermined the performance. We suspect the reason to be the task difficulty. While the Small -scale models learned from the inter-sentence baseline tasks, those tasks may not have been difficult enough to provide valuable learning signals to models at larger scales. We can also see that SSO (the fusion of NSP and SOP) is slightly more complicated than NSP and SOP, and it slightly outperformed both NSP and SOP at Base and Large scales. On the other hand, with the better use of text structure information, TSP was designed as more complicated (six inter-sentence relations instead of two or three inter-sentence relations for the inter-sentence baseline tasks, as shown in Figure 4) and more difficult. TSP provides valuable knowledge for models at all scales, especially for Large -scale models, which have the largest capability and consumed data to better exploit the difficult TSP task, thus yielding the largest improvement over other baselines as compared to the other scales. Encouraged by this observation, we expect that models with even larger model sizes and training data would also benefit significantly from learning text structure information. While TSP provided competitive or better performance on most of the tasks, we also found that it performed well on the reasoning (CB, RTE, and COPA) and question-answering (MultiRC and BoolQ) tasks. We can view a question and an answer as two texts that share a similar concept and can be placed in the same hierarchical group, such as a paragraph or a pair of consecutive sentences. 7 Likewise we can view reasoning in terms of whether two texts are coherent. From these view- points, the results are consistent with our interpretation that TSP facilitates language understanding by strengthening recognition and comparison of concepts and reasoning relationships (Section 3.2) On the other hand, although ReCoRD is a QA task, it is more like prediction of a masked entity in a paragraph given the context, which may explain why pure MLM was the leading model for ReCoRD at the Large scale. Regarding WiC, a word sense disambiguation task, TSP showed an interesting phenomenon. Compared to other baselines in the WiC task, TSP performed poorly at the Small scale, got better at the Base scale, and became the best-performing model at the Large scale. We can relate this result to our surmise on the scaling effect mentioned above. Learning of the complicated TSP stretches models’ capabilities, and small models may not have enough capability to encode in- formation that is useful for word-level tasks like WiC, whereas large models have enough capability that complicated sentence-level learning can even help with word-level understanding. While more elaborate approaches will be needed to analyze the effect of learning text structure information on different types of downstream tasks, which is outside the scope of this paper, we hope to have a good starting point by providing interesting results and explanations for those who follow. In addition to the main results, we also reported two experiment results. First, we reported scores on the SuperGLUE development set in Appendix D, which showed similar results as in Table 1. Second, to demonstrate that our proposed approach is generally useful, we did an experiment show- ing that TSP can be easily combined with another word-based pretraining task (see Appendix E for details). Additionally, this experiment also shows that TSP still improves performance in its prelim- inary results, which suggests that learning text structure information may maintain improvement on pretraining tasks other than MLM. 8

5 A BLATION S TUDY

 To investigate whether the proposed TSP text structure relations are indeed helpful, we created and experimented with different TSP variations in which some text structure relations were ablated. Specifically, MLM+TSP -hierarchy adopted only the 2 ordering relationships (normal, reversed), MLM+TSP -order adopted only the 3 hierarchical relationships (neighbor, paragraph, document), and MLM+TSP -paragraph combined the 2 ordering relationships with only the 2 hierarchical rela- tionships (neighbor, document) , with no discrimination of whether two sentences were in the same paragraph. The results on the SuperGLUE development set are shown in Table 2. First, we found that the models pretrained with TSP benefitted from both the hierarchy relationships and the ordering re- lationships, as both MLM+TSP - hierarchy and MLM+TSP - order underperformed MLM+TSP and outperformed MLM . Second, the performance slightly dropped when it was not discriminated whether two sentences were in the same paragraph, which shows that the adjacency of sentences is not the only important factor, and that discrimination of hierarchical groups at different levels matters. Although other design elements such as discrimination of sections and documents remain unexplored, we will encourage future work to explore further, whereas in this paper we focus on uncovering the potential for integrating text structure information.

6 C ONCLUSION

 Despite their stated usefulness for high-level language understanding and continued development, inter-sentence tasks have not gained enough attention as expected. Our experiments have shown that existing inter-sentence approaches for general-purpose language pretraining can not improve performance or even degrade performance at scales larger than Small . Furthermore, these existing approaches ignore a large part of text structure information and oversimplify complicated text struc- tures into one relationship between two lengthy parts of a text sequence. The goal of this paper was thus to explore the potential of utilizing text structure information to provide more valuable learning signals and maintain the improvement at larger scales. For an initial attempt to achieve this goal, we proposed Text Structure Prediction (TSP), a self-supervised inter-sentence pretraining task that can easily be combined with any encoder-based pretraining task. TSP redefines what is learned from sentence pairs via text structure relationships. Specifically, these text structure relationships combine hierarchical and ordering relationships, which can be seen as implicit learning signals for language understanding via recognition of concepts and reasoning relationships respectively. In this paper, we have shown that (1) inter-sentence baselines (NSP, SOP, SSO) were not helpful for perfor- mance at larger scales in our settings, whereas TSP improved the overall performance of models at all scales in our experiments, which again demonstrates that inter-sentence tasks for learning from inter-sentence relationships can help language understanding. Moreover, (2) the good scaling and significant improvement at the Large scale showed that the exploitation of text structure information can result in a sophisticated task that provides valuable knowledge for models with a large capability and data size. Finally, although there may still be much room for different ways to exploit text struc- ture information, we have shown the effectiveness and potential of exploiting such information, and we expect that this work will encourage more research on learning from text structure information. 9

R EFERENCES

 10 11

A P RETRAINING D ETAILS

 The details given in Table 3 apply to all the models in this paper. In most cases, we used the same hyperparameters as for BERT and ELECTRA. At the Large scale, we adopted a setting closer to BERT-Large because ELECTRA’s setting for the Large scale requires much higher memory and computational cost than our computational resource could handle. For the Large scale, we also slightly increased the batch size to 288, which we found that avoids divergence in our experiments. Additionally, inspired by BERT we trained with a sequence length of 128 for the first half of the training steps and then with a sequence length of 512 for the rest while keeping the same number of tokens in a batch to speed up pretraining in our Large -scale experiments. Note that we did not perform any hyperparameter search, although we think it could help our proposed method to perform better.

B F INETUNING D ETAILS

 Our finetuning setting (see Table 4 for details) mostly followed that of ELECTRA. Most tasks were finetuned for 3 epochs. However, inspired by ELECTRA, which increases the number of epochs to 10 for the RTE task, we also found that increasing the number of epochs to 10 helped stabilize the finetuning performance for CB and BoolQ. Except for this, we did not perform any hyperparameter search for finetuning 12 For the WiC and ReCoRD tasks, in which span embeddings for words or entities are required to compare spans with each other, we created span embeddings by applying average pooling to the final hidden representations of the tokens constructing a span and we compared spans by passing the concatenated span embeddings to the classifiers.

C S HUFFLING R ATE

 Among the sentences in a given input sequence, we randomly shuffled 15% of them while other sentences stay at their original positions, to prevent complete leakage of the original ordering and hierarchical information. We also experimented with different rates for such kind of partial shuffling, and the results are listed in Table 5. The case of no shuffling and complete shuffling gave the worst results, while there was little difference in performance for shuffling of 15 ∼ 50% . Accordingly, the results indicate that shuffling is needed, but the proposed task is not sensitive to the partial shuffling rate. We chose 15% as the partial shuffling rate in this paper because it was the lowest shuffling rate in this analysis that gave a good performance with minimal corruption of inputs.

D R ESULTS ON THE S UPER GLUE D EVELOPMENT S ET

 For reference, Table 6 lists our experimental results on the SuperGLUE development set.

E C OMBINATION WITH O THER W ORD -L EVEL P RETRAINING M ETHOD

 Because the proposed method can easily be added on top of other word-level pretraining methods, we conduct an experiment to evaluate whether the proposed method improves performance when it is not combined with MLM. ELECTRA (Clark et al., 2020), another word-level pretraining method, was adopted as the alternative to MLM in this experiment. We chose ELECTRA because it is 13 a discriminative pretraining method that performs binary classification to detect replaced words among all words, making it largely different from MLM, which is generative and predicts masked words. Although ELECTRA comprises a generator to generate inputs for discrimination and a discriminator to detect replaced tokens in generated inputs, the generator is discarded after pre- training, and only the discriminator is used for finetuning. This is why, when combining TSP with ELECTRA, we applied TSP only to the discriminator and the generation stage remained unchanged. Note that, as in the previous experiments, TSP added negligible parameters and computation to the ELECTRA pretraining. The experimental results are listed in Table 7. When combined with ELECTRA, the proposed method could still improve the SuperGLUE score. Because of limited computational resources and time, we did not perform these experiments beyond the Small -scale, but we expect that the proposed method would perform well in such cases. Overall, this experiment shows the capability of the proposed method to be combined with other word-level pretraining methods, thus suggesting the opportunity to improve such methods via text structure learning in the future. 14