

C LOSED B OUNDARY L EARNING FOR NLP C LASSIFICA - TION T ASKS WITH THE U NIVERSUM C LASS

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 The Universum class, often known as the other class or the miscellaneous class, is defined as a collection of samples that do not belong to any class of interest. It is a typical class that exists in many classification-based tasks in natural language processing (NLP), such as relation extraction, named entity recognition, sentiment analysis, etc. During data labeling, a significant number of samples are annotated as Universum because there are always some samples that exist in the dataset but do not belong to preset target classes and are not of interest in the task. The Universum class exhibits very different properties, namely heterogeneity and lack of representativeness in training data ; however, existing methods often treat the Universum class equally with the classes of interest. Although the Universum class only contains uninterested samples, improper treatment will result in the misclassification of samples of interest. In this work, we propose a closed boundary learning method that treats the Universum class and classes of interest differently. We apply closed decision boundaries to classes of interest and designate the area outside all closed boundaries in the feature space as the space of the Universum class. Specifically, we formulate the closed boundaries as arbitrary shapes, propose a strategy to estimate the probability of the Universum class according to its unique property rather than the within-class sample distribution, and propose a boundary learning loss to learn decision boundaries based on the balance of misclassified samples inside and outside the boundary. We evaluate our method on 6 state-of- the-art works in 3 different tasks, and the performance of all 6 works is improved. Our code will be released on GitHub.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 In classification-based tasks of NLP, quite often we encounter a class named as other class, miscel- laneous class, neutral class or outside (O) class. Such a class is a collection of samples that do not belong to any class of interest, such as samples of no relation class in relation extraction task. We adopt the terminology in (Weston et al., 2006) to designate all such classes as the Universum class (U). Universum class exits in various classification-based problems in NLP, such as relation extraction (RE) (Zhang et al., 2017), named entity recognition (NER) (Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003), sentiment analysis (SA) (Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003), and natural language inference (NLI) (Bowman et al., 2015). To distinguish the Universum class and the rest of the classes, we call the classes of interest as target classes (T). The set of all classes (A) in training and testing data can be expressed as A = U ∪ T • Universum class : A collection of samples that do not belong to any class of interest. • Target class : A class of interest in the task, i.e., one of the classes other than the Universum class. The sample compositions of the Universum class and target classes are usually very different. Figure 1(a) provides some samples of a target class ( entity-destination ) and the Universum class ( other ) in relation extraction. From the examples, we can observe that the entity-destination samples adhere to an intrinsic pattern: an entity goes somewhere. However, the three examples of the other relation type are vastly dissimilar and do not exhibit any common intrinsic pattern. In fact, the Universum samples are labeled according to an extrinsic pattern: they do not belong to any of the predefined target classes. 1 We further highlight the differences between the Universum class and target classes in two properties. (1) Heterogeneity : The universum class is composed of heterogeneous samples, which may form multiple clusters in the feature space, as illustrated by the green samples in Figure 1(b). This is because the Universum class, as the class name “other” implies, contains all potential implicit classes that are not explicitly defined in the task. For example, in the other samples given in Figure 1(a), implicit classes may include the entity-parallel relationship, the entity-fill relationship, and the entity- narrative relationship. (2) Lack of Representativeness in Training Data : The Universum class is the complementary set of predefined target classes in the task. Therefore, it contains all possible implicit classes, i.e., classes not explicitly defined in the task but may appear in the real world. In this case, Universum samples in the training data are unable to sufficiently represent all possible patterns of the genuine distribution of the Universum class. As depicted in Figure 1(b), gray samples represent Universum samples in the test set that are not represented by the training data. Despite the substantial difference between the target classes and the Universum class, this issue has long been neglected by the NLP research community. The majority of works (Zhu & Li, 2022; Ye et al., 2022; Wan et al., 2022; Pouran Ben Veyseh et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2021; Fu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b) treat the Universum class and target classes equally. Typically, a linear layer and a softmax function are applied at the end of the model to generate decision boundaries. The generated region of each class has open boundaries, which we believe are inappropriate for tasks containing the Universum class. How to take into account the different properties of the Universum class and target classes in classifier design? In this work, we propose a closed boundary learning method for classification-based tasks with the Universum class. Traditional methods often adopt open boundary classifiers since the problem is under the closed-world assumption. However, the open decision boundaries can easily misclassify Universum samples, as illustrated in Figure 1(c). Therefore, we propose to use closed boundary classifiers as shown in Figure 1(d). We constrain the space of target classes to be closed spaces and designate the area outside all closed boundaries in the feature space as the space of the Universum class. This treatment perfectly fits the nature of the Universum class: a sample is marked 2 as the Universum if it does not belong to any target class during labeling. The aforementioned two properties are also well addressed in this way. Although classifiers with closed boundaries are often used for problems under the open-world assumption, such as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Gomes et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022), open set recognition (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020), and anomaly detection (Zong et al., 2018), our proposed method is different from these works in the following aspects. Firstly, we are addressing a different problem here: traditional classification under the closed-world assumption. The unique properties of the Universum class are overlooked by most studies in this field, and the classifier with closed decision boundaries is rarely used in traditional classification tasks containing the Universum class. Secondly, in a methodological point of view, our method differs from works in open-world classification in both problem setting and methodology, which are elaborated in the Related Work of this paper. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: • We bring attention to an important issue that is frequently neglected in classification-based NLP tasks like NER, RE, SA, and NLI: the Universum class, such as the other class, exhibits very different properties from target classes and should be treated differently. • Methodologically, we generate closed boundaries with arbitrary shape, which include the commonly used spherical-shaped boundary as a special case. In addition, we leverage the information of both target classes and the Universum class to learn the decision boundary. We propose a boundary learning loss to generate the boundary based on the balance of misclassified Universum samples and the target class samples. In contrast to the intuitive two-step pipeline method, where Universum identification and multi-class classification may lead to error propagation, we develop a strategy to estimate the probability of the Universum class without relying on its intrinsic sample distribution and learn the classification of the Universum class and target classes jointly. • We apply our closed boundary learning framework to 6 state-of-the-art (SOTA) works in 3 different classification-based tasks with Universum class. In all 6 experiments, the accuracy or F1-score of the model is improved over the original work.

2 R ELATED W ORKS 2.1 C LASSIFICATION T ASKS WITH THE U NIVERSUM C LASS

 The Universum class widely exists in classification based tasks in NLP, such as relation extraction (Zhang et al., 2017), named entity recognition (Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003), and sentiment analysis (Jiang et al., 2019), as summarized in Table 1. It should be noted that the span-based methods (Zhu & Li, 2022; Li et al., 2021a) enumerate all possible spans and classify the entity from the whole set of spans, which introduces an extra other class. Despite the heterogeneity and lack of representativeness of the Universum class, current works (Zhu & Li, 2022; Wan et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021b; 2020; Yu et al., 2020) solve the classification problems containing the Universum class as normal multi-class classification problems and treat the Universum class and target classes equally.

2.2 C LOSED B OUNDARY L EARNING M ETHODS

 Closed boundaries are often adopted in research fields of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection (Gomes et al., 2022; Ren et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020), open set recognition (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020), anomaly detection (Zong et al., 2018), and outlier detection (Sharan et al., 2018; Sugiyama & Borgwardt, 2013). We adopt the terminology of generalized OOD detection (Yang et al., 2021b) to encompass these problems and analyze the differences between our work and generalized OOD detection. 3

2.2.1 D IFFERENCE IN P ROBLEM S ETTING

 The problem we raised in this paper lies in the intersection of open-world and closed-world assumptions. Classification tasks can be categorized into problems based on closed-world assumption and open-world assumption. • Closed-world assumption : The test data is assumed to be drawn from the same distribution as the training data, known as in-distribution (ID). • Open-world assumption : In a real-world environment, out-of-distribution (OOD) samples that are not covered in the training data are expected in the test data. The classification problem with the Universum class shares similarities and differences with both assumptions. The tasks highlighted in this paper, such as NER, RE, and SA, are problems treated under the closed-world assumption. Nevertheless, the Universum samples in these tasks are analogous to OOD samples in open-world assumption in two ways: multiple implicit classes are contained in the Universum/OOD class and there are unseen Universum/OOD samples in the test set. On the other hand, despite the similarity between the Universum and OOD samples, the problem we raised also differs significantly from open-world problems. This is because the OOD samples are not available in the training data in generalized OOD detection problems, whereas a considerable number of Universum samples are included in the training data in our problem setting. The information of existing Universum samples is important to generate accurate decision boundaries in our problem.

2.2.2 D IFFERENCE IN M ETHODOLOGY

 By definition, the OOD detection problem assumes that the training data do not contain any OOD samples. However, a branch of the OOD studies, known as outlier exposure (Katz-Samuels et al., 2022; Ming et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2021a; Thulasidasan et al., 2021; Mohseni et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2018), introduces auxiliary outlier data during training. The introduced auxiliary data makes it close to the format of our raised classification problems with the Universum class. However, outlier exposure methods are not suitable for our problem. The outlier exposure method mostly adopts a two-step approach that consists of multi-class classification and OOD identification. The OOD identification step is treated as a binary classification problem that distinguishes OOD and ID samples based on a score obtained by cross entropy (Yang et al., 2021a; Thulasidasan et al., 2021; Mohseni et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2018), and energy function (Katz-Samuels et al., 2022; Ming et al., 2022). However, both cross entropy and energy function are monotonically varying. As a result, the decision boundary derived from a threshold score of the monotonically varying function is an open boundary, which leaves the heterogeneity and representativeness issues we pointed out in this paper still unresolved. In addition, the two-step approach will also suffer from error propagation. From a methodological point of view, our work is also different from the works in generalized OOD using closed boundaries. In generalized OOD studies, the closed boundaries are formulated by the classic density-based method (Pidhorskyi et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2018), one-class classification method (Reiss et al., 2021; Ruff et al., 2018), or distance-based method (Gomes et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021; Zaeemzadeh et al., 2021; Shu et al., 2020). The distance-based methods are limited to spherical boundary shapes but our method can generate arbitrary shape boundaries. The one-class classification method formulates only one closed boundary between positive and negative samples while our work generates closed boundaries for every target class. The closed boundaries are formulated in the density-based method in cases where non-monotonic density functions are separated into the inner and outer regions by the threshold value. However, only positive samples are used to learn decision boundaries in density-based method, while both target class samples and Universum samples are used in our work.

3 M ETHOD

 Problem Definition : The goal of our proposed method is to learn closed decision boundaries for target classes and jointly classify the Universum samples and target samples. In order to make our proposed method compatible with most existing classification methods, the starting point of our method is the representations of the final layer of classification models H = { h 0 , h 1 , . . . , h n − 1 } ∈ R n × l . 4

3.1 D EFINING THE U NIVERSUM C LASS

 Universum class exists in many tasks and datasets as we summarized in Table 1. Notably, the Universum class has various names such as other and miscellaneous , etc. In sentiment analysis, the neutral class can be considered as the Universum class because the word neutral is defined as “having no strongly marked or positive characteristics or features”, which means the neutral class is a collection of all samples without strong emotions. Similarly, the no relation class in the relation extraction task can be considered as the Universum class.

3.2 D IMENSION OF THE F INAL L AYER

 In our work, the output of the final layer of the model is served as representations instead of logits, and our proposed closed boundary classifier learns decision boundaries in the feature space of the final layer. Therefore, the last layer’s dimensionality can affect the performance of the model. Recalling the classic Hughes phenomenon (Hughes, 1968) that the model accuracy is monotonically increasing first and then monotonically decreasing with the dimension of data, the dimension of the final layer can be carefully chosen to boost model performance.

3.3 P RETRAINING

 We adopt N-pair loss (Sohn, 2016) for pretraining, with the goal of achieving small intra-class distance and large inter-class distance. Notably, in accordance with the nature of the Universum class, we make a change that does not require the model to reduce the intra-class distance of Universum samples during the pretraining.

3.4 G ENERATING C LOSED B OUNDARY OF A RBITRARY S HAPE FOR TARGET CLASSES

 Existing closed boundary classification methods mainly use spherical shape boundaries (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020); however, we argue that the spherical shape may not be the optimal solution because data samples are unlikely to perfectly fit into a sphere, and a spherical shape boundary may produce misclassifications. We adopt the Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and the threshold value to generate boundaries with arbitrary shapes.

3.4.1 G AUSSIAN M IXTURE M ODEL

 We apply GMM with m components to estimate the class conditional probability distribution for each target class C i , and further derive the joint probability estimation for each class. where h k denotes the input feature vector of the k th sample, µ i and Σ i are the estimated mean vector and covariance matrix of the i th Gaussian components, respectively. π i is the non-negative mixture weight under the constraint that (cid:80) mi =1 π i = 1 . µ i , Σ i , and π i are all learnable parameters in the model. According to Bayes Theorem, the posterior probability p ( C i | h k ) = p ( h k | C i ) p ( C i ) p ( h k ) . Since we are interested in argmax C i p ( h k | C i ) p ( C i ) p ( h k ) , the decision can be made based on joint probability p ( h k , C i ) . 5

3.4.2 A RBITRARY S HAPE B OUNDARY

 Geometrical View : Inspired by the DENCLUE algorithm in generating arbi- trary shape clusters (Hinneburg & Keim, 1998), we introduce a threshold value ξ i for each target class. A closed boundary of arbitrary shape is formulated by points satisfying p ( h , C i ) = ξ i . Figure 2 is an illustration of formulating an arbitrary shape boundary in a three-dimensional space. A sample is assigned to class C i if it is located inside the closed bound- ary. If the number of components of the GMM is set to one, then the shape of the boundary becomes spherical, with its center and covariance matrix specified by µ 0 and Σ 0 , respectively. In this sense, the commonly used spherical shape boundary (Zhang et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020) is a special case of our method. Probabilistic View : The above geometrical process can be described as:

3.5 P ROBABILITY E STIMATION FOR THE U NIVERSUM C LASS 3.5.1 M OTIVATION AND THE E STIMATION

 We classify the samples of Universum class and target classes based on the following rules in this work: • Rule 1 : A sample is assigned to the Universum class if it is not located inside any of the closed boundaries of target classes. • Rule 2 : A sample is assigned to the target class with the highest p ( h k , C i ) if it is located inside at least one closed boundary. An intuitive way to incorporate the above rules is a two-step method: first, check whether the sample belongs to the Universum class according to Rule 1. Second, if the sample does not belong to the Universum class, assign the sample to the target class with the highest probability. However, such a pipeline method has the issue of error propagation. Another way is to use the distance relationship between the sample point and centers of target classes. However, the distance, e.g., Mahalanobis distance, is only a simple special case obtained from Section 3.4. In addition, the distance-based method is incompatible with cross-entropy loss, which has the benefit of being directly related to accuracy. Therefore, estimating the probability of the Universum class can allow us to jointly classify the Universum class and target classes, and is also compatible with cross-entropy loss. However, general estimation methods, such as the GMM model, may not be a practical solution to estimating the probability distribution for the Universum class due to the lack of representativeness of training samples of the Universum class. A strategy that both complies with Rule 1 and facilitates the learning of the neural network needs to be devised. For compliance with Rule 1, the estimated probability of the Universum class must be greater than the probability of all target classes and less than the probability of at least one target class for samples of the Universum class and target classes, respectively. Taking Equation 3 into account, a delicate function involving ξ i is required to address this issue. To enhance the learning of neural networks, the gradient learned from an Universum sample should help move the sample away from its closest target class boundary. Hence, max( p ( h k , C i )) is likewise needed for the estimation of probability distribution. Therefore, we propose to estimate the probability distribution of the Universum class as follows: 6 ξ i is the threshold value of target class i, and u, v ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . , n − 1 } .

3.5.2 A NALYSIS OF THE P ROPOSED E STIMATION

 For estimated probability of the Universum class in Equation 5, two cases are possible. Case 1 : p ( h k , C u ) > ξ u , i.e., sample h k is located inside at least one closed boundary. In this case, we have Since p ( h k , U ) < p ( h k , C u ) , the model will select the target class i with the highest p ( h k , C i ) , which fits perfectly with Rule 2. Case 2 : p ( h k , C u ) ≤ ξ u , i.e., the sample h k distribute outside every closed boundary. Combining the condition of case 2 and Equation 5, we have Combining Equation 5 and Equation 6, we can derive that: In case 2, from Equation 6 and Equation 3, we can learn that sample h k is located outside all closed boundaries of target classes. In this case, the probability of Universum class p ( h k , U ) obtains the largest value, as shown in Equation 7. Therefore, Rule 1 is perfectly expressed by the proposed probability estimation of the Universum class.

3.6 B OUNDARY L EARNING L OSS

 To facilitate the learning of the closed decision boundaries, we propose a boundary learning loss below. The decision boundary should be adjusted to the balance of misclassified samples inside and outside the boundary. For example, if samples of class j distribute inside the boundary of class i , then the boundary should contract to exclude such samples and vice versa. M is the total number of misclassified samples for all boundaries, N is the number of classes, O and I denote the set of samples misclassified outside and inside the decision boundary i , respectively. The weights in the loss function are w k = and they are detached and cut off the gradient. Weights w k and w l have smaller values for samples located far from the boundary, enabling the boundary to be adjusted primarily on the basis of easily and semi-hard negatives instead of hard negatives.

4 E XPERIMENTS 4.1 D ATASETS

 Our proposed method is evaluated on six different SOTA models on three classic datasets in NLP, including SemEval 2010 Task 8 (Hendrickx et al., 2019) for relation extraction, MAMS (Jiang et al., 2019) for aspect category sentiment analysis, and CoNLL-2003 (Tjong Kim Sang & De Meulder, 2003) for named entity recognition. The proportion of Universum samples in the three datasets are 17.4% (highest in 19 classes), 90%, and 43.4%. respectively. It is noteworthy that the ratio of 7 Universum class in the NER task is not calculated from the miscellaneous samples in the dataset but from the other samples which are introduced by the span-based method (Zhu & Li, 2022; Fu et al., 2021). Particularly, the span-based methods enumerate all possible spans for prediction, which lead to a large number of other samples.

4.2 B ASELINES AND E VALUATION M ETRICS

 We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed C l O sed b O undary L earning for classiciation with the U niversum class ( COOLU ) on 6 state-of-the-art works, including SpanNER (Fu et al., 2021), BS (Zhu & Li, 2022), A-GCN (Tian et al., 2021), TaMM (Chen et al., 2021), AC-MIMLLN (Li et al., 2020) and SCAPT (Li et al., 2021b). The implementation details are in the Appendix. We employ the evaluation metrics used in the original models for comparison. Specifically, the accuracy is used in the task of ACSA, and the Macro F1 is used in tasks of NER and RE.

4.3 O VERALL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

 Table 2 shows the overall results for all 6 models. We reproduce the baseline models based on the officially released source code, and apply closed boundary learning on the source code. All reported results are the average of three runs. It should be noted that some results of baseline models are slightly different from those given in the original papers due to the variations in random seeds and package versions when reproducing baseline models from their officially released codes. Nevertheless, baseline models and models with closed boundary learning are fairly compared in our work under the same random seed and deep learning environment. Models with our proposed closed boundary learning outperform the original models with open classifiers on NLP tasks containing the Universum class. The overall accuracy or F1 score is improved on all six models we evaluated, with the largest improvement from 92 . 09 to 93 . 50 in F1 score by simply adopting the closed boundary learning without changing the model.

4.4 A C LOSER L OOK AT THE I MPROVEMENTS

 The improvement of overall performance is not only attributed to the improvement of the Universe class, but also to the improvement of all classes as a whole. We show the micro F1 score of each class by applying closed boundary learning on SpanNER in Table 3. The micro F1 score of other class, which is introduced by the span-based method, is not listed in the table because the overall F1 score of the task depends on the F1 score of the four entity types below. The micro F1 score is improved in all classes, with the absolute improvement of 2 . 43 , 0 . 29 , 1 . 31 , and 4 . 02 , respectively. In addition, the precision score of each entity type is also improved significantly by adopting the closed boundary learning, with the largest absolute gain being 9 . 03 . The relatively poor performance of the baseline method in precision score is consistent with our argument that the Universum class is easily misclassified if its special properties are neglected. The improvement in precision score indicates that our method can effectively avoid misclassification of the Universum class into target classes. 8

4.5 A BLATION S TUDY ON N- PAIR L OSS P RETRAINING

 To further demonstrate the effectiveness of our closed boundary learning method and to rule out the possibility that the improvement of our model is due to the N-pair loss pretraining we adopted we add an additional pretraining step to baseline models of SpanNER (Fu et al., 2021) and SCAPT (Li et al., 2021b). Table 4 indicates that the pretraining process alone cannot improve the accuracy of the original baseline models. The improvement brought about by our proposed closed boundary learning is not a result of the pretraining step but the result of the entire system

4.6 T HE I MPACT OF THE F INAL L AYER D IMENSION

 We investigate the effect of last layer dimension on the accuracy of the model on the SpanNER (Fu et al., 2021) with closed boundary learning and present the result in Figure 3. The F1 score of the test set grows with increasing of dimensions and reaches a maximum value of 93 . 88 when the dimension is seven, and then decreases with the dimension. The trend fits well with the famous Hughes phenomenon Hughes (1968). Our method is not significantly affected by dimension and the overall result of SpanNER + COOLU reported in Table 2 is set as ten rather than the optimal value.

5 D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION

 In this work, we highlight an overlooked issue in classification-based NLP tasks that the Universum class is treated equally with target classes despite their significant differences. We propose a closed boundary learning method COOLU as a solution to this problem. Specifically, we generate closed boundaries with arbitrary shapes, develop a strategy to estimate the probability of the Universum class without relying on its intrinsic sample distribution, and propose a boundary learning loss to adjust decision boundaries based on the balance of misclassified samples inside and outside the boundary. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed COOLU method improves the performance of all SOTA baseline models. The classification with the Universum problem that we emphasized brides the two distinct research areas of traditional classification and generalized OOD detection by exposing that the Universum class introduces open-world information to the task under the closed- world assumption. In addition, the closed decision boundaries can help the model to distinguish the knowledge boundary learned from the training data, which may contribute to the transferability of the model. 9 EMNLP , 3550–3560, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.287. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.287 . 10 11 12

A A PPENDIX A.1 I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

 In the six baseline models we selected, different results based on multiple language models are often reported in one work. We choose one of the pretrained models used in each work and reproduce the baseline models. The pretrained language model we used in each baseline and their reported results are summarized in Table 5 13