

B ERT N ET : H ARVESTING K NOWLEDGE G RAPHS FROM P RETRAINED L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Symbolic knowledge graphs (KGs) have been constructed either by expensive human crowdsourcing or with complex text mining pipelines. The emerging large pretrained language models (LMs), such as B ERT , have shown to implicitly encode massive knowledge which can be queried with properly designed prompts. How- ever, compared to the explicit KGs, the implict knowledge in the black-box LMs is often difficult to access or edit and lacks explainability. In this work, we aim at harvesting symbolic KGs from the LMs, and propose a new framework for auto- matic KG construction empowered by the neural LMs’ flexibility and scalability. Compared to prior works that often rely on large human annotated data or existing massive KGs, our approach requires only the minimal definition of relations as inputs, and hence is suitable for extracting knowledge of rich new relations that are instantly assigned and not available before. The framework automatically generates diverse prompts, and performs efficient knowledge search within a given LM for consistent outputs. The knowledge harvested with our approach shows competitive quality, diversity, and novelty. As a result, we derive from diverse LMs a family of new KGs (e.g., B ERT N ET and R O BERT A N ET ) that contain a richer set of relations, including some complex ones (e.g., "A is capable of but not good at B" ) that cannot be extracted with previous methods. Besides, the resulting KGs also serve as a vehicle to interpret the respective source LMs, leading to new insights into the varying knowledge capability of different LMs.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Symbolic knowledge graphs (KGs) encode rich knowledge about entities and their relationships, and have been one of the major means for organizing commonsense or domain-specific information to empower various applications, including search engines (Xiong et al., 2017; Google, 2012), recommendation systems (Wang et al., 2019a; 2018; 2019b), chatbots (Moon et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019b), healthcare (Li et al., 2019; Mohamed et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020), etc. The common practice for constructing a KG is crowdsourcing (such as ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017), WordNet (Fellbaum, 2000), and ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019)) , which is accurate but often has limited coverage due to the extreme cost of manual annotation (e.g., ConceptNet covers only 34 types of commonsense relations). Prior work has also built text mining pipelines to automatically extract knowledge from unstructured text, including domain-specific knowledge (Wang et al., 2021b) and commonsense knowledge (Zhang et al., 2020; Romero et al., 2019; Nguyen et al., 2021). Those systems, however, often involves a complex set of components (e.g., entity recognition, coreference resolution, relation extraction, etc.), and applicable only to a subset of all the knowledge, which is explicitly stated in the text. On the other hand, the emerging large language models (LMs) pretrained on massive text corpora, such as B ERT (Devlin et al., 2019), R O B ERTA (Liu et al., 2019a), and GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), have been shown to encode a large amount of knowledge implicitly in their parameters. This has inspired the interest in using the LMs as knowledge bases. For example, recent work has focused on manually or automatically crafted prompts (e.g., "Obama was born in " ) to query the LMs for answers (e.g., "Hawaii" ) (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021) . Such probing also serves as a way to interpret the black-box LMs (Swamy et al., 2021), and inspires further fine-tuning to improve knowledge quality (Elazar et al., 2021b; Newman et al., 2021; Fichtel et al., 2021). However, the black-box LMs, where knowledge is only implicitly encoded, fall short of the many nice properties of explicit KGs (AlKhamissi et al., 2022), such as the 1 easiness of browsing the knowledge or even making updates (Zhu et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021) and the explainability for trustworthy use by domain experts. Can we automatically harvest KGs from the LMs , and hence combine the best of both worlds, namely the flexibility and scalability from the neural LMs, and the access, editability, and explainability in the symbolic form? This paper makes a step towards this end—given a pretrained LM (e.g., B ERT , R O B ERTA ), our automatic framework extracts a KG from it in an efficient and scalable way—this results in a family of new KGs (referred to as, e.g., B ERT N ET , R O B ERTA N ET ) that permit a new extendable set of knowledge beyond the existing hand-annotated KGs such as ConceptNet. As Table 1 suggests, our framework is more flexible compared with previous works to construct knowledge graphs automatically. The new goal of extracting KGs purely from any LMs poses unique challenges. First, it is difficult to extract knowledge reliably from LMs, as the LMs have shown to generate inconsistent outputs given prompts of slightly different wording (e.g., " originally aired in " vs " premiered on " ) (Elazar et al., 2021b; Newman et al., 2021). Automatically learn- ing the optimal prompts (Lester et al., 2021; Zhong et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021) typically requires many existing entity pairs as training data, which is often not available especially for new relations that are instantly assigned. While West et al. (2021) extracted commonsense knowledge of high quality from GPT-3, this method doesn’t apply to other LMs, since it relies on the extreme few-shot learning ability and the large capacity of GPT-3 model. To this end, we apply an unsupervised method that automatically paraphrases an initial prompt and create a diverse set of alternative prompts with varying confidence weights. We then search for entity pairs that consistently satisfy the diverse prompts. The second challenge lies in the search phase due to the large space of entity (one or multiple tokens) tuples. We devise an efficient search-and-rescoring strategy that strikes the balance between knowledge accuracy and coverage. The minimal dependence on other sources besides the powerful LM itself allows maximal flexibility of our framework to extract novel knowledge, such as those about complex relations like “A is capable of, but not good at, B” that expresses sophisticated meaning and “A can do B at C” that involves multiple entities. Besides, the resulting KGs can readily serve as a symbolic interpretation of the respective black-box LMs, for users to browse and understand their knowledge storage and capability. We apply the framework to harvest KGs from a wide range of popular LMs, including R O B ERT A, B ERT , and D ISTIL B ERT , of varying model sizes, respectively. The experiments show our approach can harvest large-scale KGs of diverse concepts, and performs well on user-defined complex relations. Compared with other KGs trained with existing knowledge bases or human annotations, the outcome KGs of our framework, with solely a LM as the knowledge source, shows competitive quality, diversity and novelty. The further analysis illustrates the better balance of knowledge accuracy and coverage than baselines. Comparison between the resulting KGs from different LMs offers new insights into their knowledge capacities due to different factors, such as model sizes, pretraining strategies, and distillation. 2

2 R ELATED W ORK

 Knowledge graph construction Popular knowledge bases or KGs are usually constructed with heavy human labor. For example, WordNet (Fellbaum, 2000) is a lexical database that links words into semantic relations; ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) is a large commonsense knowledge graph in the conventional KG format that consists of (head entity, relation, tail entity) triples; ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019) is a social commonsense KG by crowdsourcing consisting of if-then statements. Automatic Knowledge Graph Construction has been focused by academics. We summarize different categories of works in Table 1. Text mining based works aim to extract knowledge from text. A typical information extraction system (Angeli et al., 2015) decomposes the task to a set of sub-tasks, such as co-reference resolution, named entity recognition, and relationship extraction. There are also works on commonsense knowledge extraction, like WebChild (Tandon et al., 2014), TransOMCS (Zhang et al., 2020), DISCOS (Fang et al., 2021b), Quasimod o(Romero et al., 2019), ASCENT (Nguyen et al., 2021). These extraction pipelines are based on linguistic pattern, and involve complex engineering such as corpus selection, term aggregation, filtering and so on. Recently there are attempts to make use of language models. Wang et al. (2021a) finetuned LMs to predict missed links in KGs. COMET (Bosselut et al., 2019) is a finetuned generative LM trained to generate tail entities given head entities and relations. Symbolic knowledge distillation (KD) (West et al., 2021) distil the knowledge in GPT-3 to a generative LM. As a intermediate product, they got ATOMIC 10 x by prompting GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) with examples. However, this method only applies to GPT-3 for the need of strong few-shot learning ability. Factual probing (Petroni et al., 2019; AlKhamissi et al., 2022; Razniewski et al., 2021) measures the amount of knowledge in LMs by the accuracy when filling a blank in a prompt, which is human-written, from text mining, or learned with a large amount of existing knowledge. We summarize their difference to our work in the caption of Table 1 To the best of our knowledge , our framework is the first to construct a knowledge graph via extracting knowledge purely from LMs (with minimal definition of relations as input). LMs as knowledge bases It is easy to query knowledge in knowledge bases, while the implicit knowledge in LMs are difficult to access. The retrieval of knowledge in LMs often requires finetuning (Da et al., 2021; Wallat et al., 2020) or prompt tuning (Qin & Eisner, 2021; Jiang et al., 2020; Adolphs et al., 2021; Davison et al., 2019; Petroni et al., 2019) with existing knowledge, limiting their methods to query new relations without existing tuples. Together with the success of pretrained LMs , recent work has developed various ways to understand their internal mechanisms, such as analyzing the internal states of LMs, and extracting structured linguistic patterns (Tenney et al., 2019; Hewitt & Manning, 2019). Factual probing aims to quantify the factual knowledge in pretrained language models, which is usually implemented by prompting methods and leveraging the masked language model pretraining task. Specifically, the amount of factual knowledge is estimated by a set of human-written cloze-style prompts, e.g., "Dante was born in " . The accuracy of the model prediction on the blank represents a lower bound of the amount of knowledge in the model. LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019) collects a set of human-written prompts to detect the amount of factual information that a masked language model encodes. LPAQA (Jiang et al., 2020) proposes to use text mining and paraphrasing to find and select prompts to optimize the prediction of a single or a few correct tail entities, instead of extensively predicting all the valid entity pairs like in our framework. AutoPrompt (Shin et al., 2020) and OPTIPrompt (Zhong et al., 2021) search prompts automatically. Though making prompts unreadable, they achieve higher accuracy on the knowledge probing tasks. Instead of measuring knowledge inside an LM as an accuracy number, our framework explicitly harvests a KG from the LM. Consistency is a significant challenge in knowledge probing and extraction, which refers to a model that should not have predictions contradicting each other. Basically, models should behave invariantly under inputs with different surface forms but the same meaning, e.g., paraphrased sentences or prompts. Several benchmarks are proposed to study consistency in LMs (Elazar et al., 2021a; Hase et al., 2021). Elazar et al. (2021a) analyzes the consistency of pretrained language models with respect to the factual knowledge. They show that the consistency of all LMs is poor in their experiment. In our framework, the extracted entity pairs for each relation would consistently satisfy a diverse set of prompts. Unlike traditional KGs, it is also non-trivial to edit knowledge in LMs, though there is some preliminary research on editing facts in LMs (Zhu et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2021), via forcing the model to change predictions on some data points while keeping the same for other data points. There is also another line of works that utilize LMs to score entity pairs (Feldman et al., 2019; Bouraoui et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2021b;a) . However, these works only use LMs to filter candidate knowledge tuples that are collected either 3 from the Internet or existing KGs, but they don’t direclty extract knowledge inside the LMs as our framework.

3 H ARVESTING KG S FROM LM S

 This section presents the proposed framework for extracting a relational KG from a given pretrained LM, where the LM can be arbitrary fill-in-the-blank models such as B ERT (Devlin et al., 2019), R O B ERT A (Liu et al., 2019a), BART (Lewis et al., 2020), or GPT-3 (with appropriate instructions) (Brown et al., 2020). The KG consists of a set of knowledge tuples in the form <head entity ( h ), relation ( r ), tail entity ( t )> . Specifically, we automatically harvest from the LM all appropriate entity pairs ( h, t ) for any given relation r . This presents a substantially more challenging problem than the popular LM probing tasks (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021) which predict a particular tail entity given both the head entity and relation. In contrast, given only the relation, we need to search for hundreds or thousands of head/tail entity pairs both accurately and extensively in an efficient manner. To extract knowledge tuples of a particular relation (e.g., "potential_risk" as illustrated in Figure 1), our approach requires only minimal input information that defines the relation of interest, namely an initial prompt (e.g., The potential risk of A is B ) together with a few shot of seed entity pairs (e.g., <eating candy, tooth decay> ). The prompt offers the overall semantics of the relation, while the seed entity pairs serve to eliminate any possible ambiguities. For new relations not included in existing KGs, it is impractical to require a large set (e.g., hundreds) of seed entity pairs as in previous knowledge probing or prompt optimization methods (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2019; Zhong et al., 2021). Instead, our approach needs only a very small set, such as 5 example pairs in our experiments, which can easily be collected or written by users. A key challenge of directly feeding the initial prompt and asking the LM to generate head/tail entities is that the outputs are often inconsistent: for example, slightly changing the wording of the prompt (while keeping the same semantic) can easily lead to different irrelevant LM outputs (Elazar et al., 2021a; Hase et al., 2021). The inconsistency renders the extracted knowledge unreliable and often inaccurate (as also shown in our experiments). Inspired by and generalizing the prior knowledge probing work (Petroni et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021), we overcome the challenge by automatically creating diverse weighted prompts describing the same relation of interest, and searching for those entity pairs that are consistently favored by the multiple 4 prompts under the LM. Interestingly, we found that those automatically created prompts, though stemming from the initial prompt (often written by a human), are often better alternatives than the initial prompt itself for drawing more accurate knowledge from the LMs, as studied in our experiments. In the following sections, we describe the core components of our approach, namely the automatic creation of diverse prompts with confidence weights (§3.1) and the efficient search to discover consistent entity pairs (§3.2) that compose the desired KGs. Figure 1 illustrate the overall framework.

3.1 A UTOMATIC C REATION OF D IVERSE W EIGHTED P ROMPTS

 Given the input information of a relation, namely the initial prompt and a few shots of seed entity pairs, we automatically paraphrase the initial prompt to a large set of prompts that are linguistically diverse but semantically describe the same relation. Each of the prompts is further associated with a confidence weight for an accurate measure of knowledge consistency in the next section. Specifically, starting with the initial prompt, we randomly sample an entity pair from the seed set and insert it into the prompt to form a complete sentence. We then use an off-the-shelf text paraphrase model (see §4.1 for more details) to produce multiple paraphrased sentences of the same meaning. By removing the entity names, each paraphrased sentence results in a new prompt that describes the desired relation. To ensure diverse expressions of the relation, we keep those prompts that are sufficiently different from each other in terms of edit distance. We repeat this process by continuing the paraphrasing of the newly created prompts, until we collect at least 10 prompts for the relation. The automatic creation of prompts is inevitably noisy. Some of the resulting prompts are less precise in expressing the exact meaning of the desired relation. we define a reweighting score for each prompt to calibrate its effect in the next knowledge search step. Specifically, we measure the compatibility of the new prompts with the seed entity pairs, and derive the prompt weights with the compatibility scores. Intuitively, given an entity pair ⟨ h, t ⟩ , a compatible prompt p should induce a high likelihood under the LM for each single entity plugged into the prompt. That is, the minimum likelihood of h and t should be high. Besides, we also expect a high joint likelihood of h and t . Formally, the compatibility score is written as: where the first term is the joint log-likelihood under the LM distribution P LM , the second term is the minimum individual log-likelihood given the prompt (and the other entity), and α is a balancing factor for which we set α = 2 / 3 in our experiments. We compute the average compatibility score of each created prompt over all seed entity pairs. The weight of the prompt is then defined as the softmax-normalized score across all prompts.

3.2 E FFICIENT S EARCH FOR C ONSISTENT K NOWLEDGE T UPLES

 Given the above set of prompts with confidence weights, we next harvest entity pairs that consis- tently satisfy all the prompts. Each entity consists of one or more tokens. We reuse the above prompt/entity-pair compatibility function (Eq.1) and intuitively define the consistency of a new entity pair ⟨ h new , t new ⟩ as the weighted average of its compatibility with the different prompts: where w p is the prompt weight and the sum is over all automatically created prompts as above. Therefore, an entity pair that is compatible with all prompts are considered to be consistent. Based on the consistency criterion, we devise an efficient search strategy for consistent entity pairs. A straightforward approach is to simply enumerate all possible pairs of entities, measure the respective consistency scores as above, and pick the top-K entity pairs with highest scores as the resulting knowledge for the KG. The approach can be prohibitively slow given the large vocabulary size V and the high time complexity of the enumeration (e.g., O ( V 2 ) assuming each entity consists of only one token). To this end, we introduce appropriate approximation that leads to a more efficient search and re- scoring method. More concretely, we first use the minimum individual log-likelihoods (namely, the 5 second term in the compatibility score Eq.1), weighted averaged across different prompts (similar as in Eq.2), to propose a large set of candidate entity pairs. The use of the minimum individual log-likelihoods allows us to apply rich thresholding and pruning strategies (e.g., thresholding on log P LM ( h | p ) for proposing the head entities), as described more in the appendix. Once we collect a large number of proposals, we re-rank them with the full consistency score in Eq.2 and pick the top-K instances as the output knowledge. We describe more nuanced handling in the search procedure (e.g., the processing of multi-token entities) in the appendix. Generalization to complex relations Most existing KGs or knowledge bases include relations that are predicates connecting two entities, e.g., "A is capable of B" . Yet, many relations in the real life can be more complex. Our approach is flexible and easily extensible to extract knowledge about those complex relations. We demonstrate in our experiments with two cases: (1) highly customized relations that have specific and sophisticated meaning, such as "A is capable of, but not good at, B" . Such sophisticated knowledge is often hard for human to manually write down massively. Our automatic approach naturally supports harvesting such knowledge given only an initial prompt and few seed entities; (2) n -ary relations involving more than 2 entities, such as "A can do B at C" . Our approach can straightforwardly be extended to deal with n -ary relations by generalizing the above compatibility score and search strategy accordingly to accommodate more than two entities. Symbolic interpretation of neural LMs The harvested knowledge tuples, as consistently recog- nized by the LM cross varying prompts, can be seen as the underlying “beliefs” (Stich, 1979; Hase et al., 2021) of the LM about the world. The interpretable symbolic tuples allow us to easily browse those beliefs, analyze the knowledge capability of the black-box LM, and make intrinsic comparisons between different LMs to understand the effect of diverse configurations, such as model sizes and pretraining strategies, as we showcased in the experiments.

4 E XPERIMENTS

 We validate the effectiveness of the proposed knowledge harvesting framework with extensive experiments. We conduct human evaluation of our outcome KGs, and illustrate the effectiveness of the automatically created prompts in our framework. Besides, using our framework as a tool to interpret the LM knowledge storage, we make interesting observations about several knowledge- related questions on the black-box LMs. We will release the whole family of extracted KGs, as well as the code implementation of our framework (included in the supplementary materials), upon acceptance.

4.1 S ETUP

 Relations We extract knowledge about a large diverse set of relations. We collect relations from two existing knowledge repositories, and also test on a set of new relations not included in existing KGs. Specifically, our relations include (1) ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017) is one of the most popular commonsense KGs and is widely used for evaluating knowledge extraction. Following Li et al. (2016), we filter the KG and subsample a set of 20 common relations (e.g. has_subevent , motivated_by_goal ). The initial prompts for the relations are from the ConceptNet repository, and we randomly sample seed entity pairs from the ConceptNet KG for each relation. (2) LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019) is a popular benchmark for factual probing, containing knowledge tuples from multiple sources. Following the recent work (Jiang et al., 2020; Shin et al., 2020; Zhong et al., 2021), we use the T-REx split 41 Wikipedia relations, such as capital_of , member_of ). For each relation, the human-written prompt provided in Petroni et al. (2019) is used as the initial prompt and we randomly sample seed entity pairs for each relation. (3) New Relations : To test the flexibility of our framework for harvesting novel knowledge, we write 14 new relations of interests that can hardly be found in any existing KGs, and manually write initial prompts and seed entity pairs for them. The resulting relations include complex relations as described in §3.2. More details, e.g., initial prompts, and seed entities of relations, can be found in the appendix. 6 Head entity Relation Tail entity Head entity Relation Tail entity humidity prevent excessive temprature viruses potential risk virus transmission care prevent harm prolonged sleep potential risk sleep disorders local council can help village serious offence potential risk conviction therapist can help client electricity ingredient for electric lamp lake place for picnic tables rice ingredient for soup studios place for live shows milk ingredient for butter apple tree can but not good wood locomotive can but not good speed trains Relation: A can do B at C (people, communicate, web) Relation: A needs B to C (singers, vocal accompaniment, dance) Relation: A can do B at C (adult couples, marry, marriage) Relation: A needs B to C (human lives, survival, flourish) Relation: A can do B at C (skier, ski downhill, mountain) Relation: A needs B to C (actors, dialogue, portray characters) Hyperparameters We use 5 seed entity pairs for each relation. To automatically collect prompts (§3.1), we use GPT-3 with the instruction "paraphrase:{sentence}" as the off-the-shelf paraphraser. In the entity pair searching (§3.2), we restrict every entity to appear no more than 10 times to improve the diversity of generated knowledge and search out at most 50,000 entity tuples for each relation. We finally use various scoring thresholds to get the outcome KGs in different scales, including (1) 50% : taking a half of all searched-out entities with higher consistency (Eq. 2). (2) base-k : Naturally there are different numbers of valid tuples for different relations (e.g. tuples of C APITAL O F should not exceed 200 as that is the number of all the countries in the world). We design a relation-specific thresholding method, that is to set 10% of the k -nd consistency as the threshold (i.e., 0 . 1 ∗ consistency k ), and retain all tuples with consistency above the threshold. We name the settings base-10 and base-100 when k is 10 and 100, respectively.

4.2 E VALUATION 4.2.1 E VALUATING OUTCOME

 We apply our framework to extract knowledge graph of ConceptNet (CN) re- lations and New relations from language models, and then conduct human eval- uation on the accuracy of the extracted knowledge with Amazon MTurk. The correctness of each ex- tracted knowledge tuple is labeled by 3 annotators with True/False/Unjudgeable. A tuple would be "accepted" (acc) if at least 2 annota- tors think it is true knowl- edge, and "rejected" (rej) if at least 2 annotators rate it as false. We provide more details of human evaluation in the appendix. The statistics of the gener- ated KGs from our frame- work (R OBERTA N ET ) and other knowledge extraction methods are mentioned in Table 2, and the samples of the extracted KG from D ISTILL BERT can be found in Figure 2. The acceptance rate, indicating the precision of KGs, in Table 2 are not comparable to each other, and only serves for a rough sense. From those statistics, we can see that with solely the LM as the knowledge source, and without any training data, our framework extracts KGs with competitive accuracy. Compared to 7 COMET, our precision is a little lower, which is expected due to the big compromise we make in the setting and our searching constraints ensure better diversity and novelty of R O BERT A N ET over COMET.

4.2.2 E VALUATING AUTOMATIC PROMPT CREATION

 To evaluate the effect of our automatic creation of prompts, we compare the generated KGs under these settings of prompts on the human-written new relations: (1) Multi-Prompts refers to the the full framework described in §3 which use the automatically created diverse prompts in knowledge search. (2) Top-1 Prompt : To ablate the effect of ensembling multiple prompts, we evaluate the variant that uses only the prompt with largest weight (§3.1) for knowledge extraction. (3) Human Prompt : To further understand the effectiveness of the automatically created prompts, we assess the variant that uses the initial prompt (typically written by human) of each relation. (4) AutoPrompt (Shin et al., 2020), which was proposed to learn prompts by optimizing the likelihood of tail entity prediction on the training set. To fit in our setting, we adapt it to optimize the compatibility score (Eq.1) on the seed entity pairs. We omit other prompt tuning work (e.g., Zhong et al., 2021; Qin & Eisner, 2021) because they either are difficult to fit in our problem or require more training data and fail with only the few shot of seed entity pairs in our setting. The human-annotated accuracy is shown in Table 3. Our T OP -1 P ROMPT significantly improves the accuracy up to 9% over the H UMAN P ROMPT , indicating our prompt searching algorithm can produce high quality prompts. M ULTI -P ROMPTS further improves the accuracy by around 4%, which means the combination of diverse prompts better capture the semantics of a relation. The method using the optimized prompt by A UTO P ROMPT gives a lower accuracy than the one with the human or searched prompt, because the small set of seed knowledge tuples are insufficient for learning effective prompts for the desired relations. Based on the results above, we move a step forward to see how the created prompts influence the subsequent module in the framework. Specifically, we evaluate if the automatically created prompts (§3.1) bring the consistency scoring (§3.2) better balance of knowledge accuracy (precision) and coverage (recall), by comparing various scoring methods on existing terms in ConceptNet and LAMA dataset. To be more detailed, we use the knowledge tuples from ConceptNet and LAMA as positive samples (§4.1), and synthesize the same amount of negative samples with the same strategy in Li et al. (2016) by random replacing entities or relations in the true knowledge. Each evaluated method estimates a score of each sample being positive (i.e., true knowledge), and ranks the samples based 8 on the scores. We can then compute both the precision and recall of positive samples at different cut-off points along the ranking, and plot the precision-recall curves for each method. The automatic evaluation setting on given knowledge terms also enables us to adapt existing prevalent works, e.g., KG completion and factual probing (Table 1), for comparison with our approach: (1) COMET (Bosselut et al., 2019) is a transformer-based KG completion model trained to predict the tail entity t conditioning on the head entity and relation ( h, r ) on ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019). The model has encoded rich commonsense knowledge. We thus test it on the ConceptNet commonsense data, and use its log-likelihood log P ( t | h, r ) as the score for each given knowledge tuple. (2) LPAQA (Jiang et al., 2020) collects a set of prompts on LAMA with text mining and paraphrasing, and ensembles them to optimize the factual probing task (and thus cannot extract new knowledge like ours). We report the best performance of its three variants. The resulting precision-recall curves on ConceptNet and LAMA knowledge are shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4, respectively. The variant of our T OP -1 P ROMPT from our automatically-collected prompt set is significantly better than the H UMAN P ROMPT . This is because the human-written prompts often fail to effectively account for possible ambiguities in the expression, which are eliminated in our approach by leveraging the seed entity pairs with compatibility measure. Increasing the number of prompts (M ULTI -P ROMPTS ) provides further improvements, showing the multiple automatically created prompts can represent the desired relations more accurately and better guide the LMs for consistency. Our approach also substantially outperforms other baselines, like C OMET on ConceptNet and LPAQA on LAMA, indicating better knowledge correctness (precision) and coverage (recall) of our framework in the context. On both datasets, A UTO P ROMPT , with only 5 seed entity pairs as its training data, gives inferior performance than other approaches, indicating that the current prompt optimization is not feasible for discovering knowledge of new relations without large training data.

4.3 A NALYSIS OF K NOWLEDGE IN D IFFERENT LM S

 As discussed in §3, the outcome knowledge graphs can be treated as a fully symbolic interpretation of pretrained language models. We use M ULTI -P ROMPTS to harvest KGs from 5 different LMs and evaluate them with human annotation. The results are shown in Table 4, which sheds some new light on several knowledge-related questions regarding the LMs’ knowledge capacity. Does a larger LM encode better knowledge? For BERT (and RoBERTa), the large version and the base version share the same pretraining corpus and tasks, respectively, while the large version has a larger model architecture than the base version in terms of layers (24 v.s. 12), attention heads (16 v.s. 12), and the number of parameters (340M v.s. 110M). We can see that BertNet-large and RoBERTaNet-large are around 7% and 3% higher than their base version, separately, so the large models indeed encoded better knowledge than the base models. Does better pretraining bring better knowledge? RoBERTa uses the same architecture as BERT but with better pretraining strategies, like dynamic masking, larger batch size, etc. In their extracted knowledge graphs from our framework, RoBERTaNet-large performs better than BertNet-large (0.73 v.s. 0.70), and RoBERTaNet-base is also better than BertNet-base (0.70 v.s. 0.63), which indicates the better pretraining indeed bring the better knowledge learning and storage. Is knowledge really kept in the knowledge distillation process? DistilBERT is trained by distilling BERT-base, and reduces 40% parameters from it. Interestingly, the knowledge distillation process instead improves around 4% of accuracy in the result knowledge graph. This might be because the knowledge distillation is able to remove some noisy information from the teacher model.

5 C ONCLUSION

 We have developed an automatic framework that extracts a KG from a pretrained LM (e.g, B ERT , R O B ERTA ), in an efficient and scalable way, resulting in a family of new KGs, which we refer to as B ERT N ET , R O B ERTA N ET , etc. Our framework is capable of extracting knowledge of arbitrary new relation types and entities, without being restricted by pre-existing knowledge or corpora. The resulting KGs also serve as interpretation to the source LMs, bringing new insights of the knowledge capability in various LMs. Our current design and experimental studies are limited on LMs in the generic domain, and are not yet been studied in specific domains such as extracting healthcare knowledge from relevant neural models. We leave the exciting work of harvesting knowledge from various kinds of neural networks across applications and domains in the future work. 9 Ethical considerations In this work, the harvested knowledge is automatically generated by LMs. We would like to note that the language models could possibly generate unethical knowledge tuples, same with the risks of other applications using language models for generation. We hope that the knowledge extraction study could offer techniques to better interpret and understand the language models, and in turn foster the future research of language model ethics. Since the knowledge graph only consists simple phrases, we think filtering sensitive words would be effective. No foreseeable negative societal impacts are caused by the method itself

R EFERENCES

 10 lms with mixtures of soft prompts. In NAACL , 2021. 11 12

A A PPENDIX A.1 C OMPUTE RESOURCE

 All of our experiments are running on a single Nvidia GTX1080Ti GPU. Harvesting a knowledge graph of one relation with Roberta-large takes about one hour.

A.2 T HE LICENSE OF THE ASSETS

 All the data we used in this paper, including datasets, relation definitions, and seed entity pairs, etc., are officially public resources.

A.3 P REPROCESSING OF C ONCEPT N ET

 We filter out some linguistic relations (e.g. etymologically derived from ) and some trivial relations (e.g. related to ). We only consider the tuples with confidence higher than 1, and filter out relations comprising less than 1000 eligible tuples. We don’t directly take the test set from Li et al. (2016) because they reserve a lot of tuples for training, resulting in a small and unbalanced test set.

A.4 R ELATION DEFINITIONS

 The initial prompts of ConceptNet are from its repository 1 . For LAMA relations, we use the human written "template" for every relation as the initial prompt, which are all included in the LAMA dataset. All the New relations , together with the generated prompts, are shown in Table 5 and the list below.

A.5 P ROCESSING OF MULTI - TOKEN ENTITIES

 Each entity may take more than one BPE tokens when conducting the mask-filling task. In our entity searching step, before searching the tokens to fill the mask, we enumerate the number of masks for every entity.

A.6 H UMAN EVALUATION

 The wage is $0.15 for each three questions. The average time for answering a question is about 15 seconds, so the estimated wage of an hour is $12 per hour. The total cost on human annotation is $1580. We present the screenshot of the instruction in Figure 5 and question in Figure 6. The inter-annotator agreement (Krippendorff’s Alpha) is 0.27, showing fair agreement. 1 https://github.com/commonsense/conceptnet5/wiki/Relations (the "Description" column.) 13 worth celebrating It’s worth celebrating for a ENT 0 to ENT 1 14 The generated prompts are listed below: 1. somebody do something at : at the ENT 2 , ENT 0 can ENT 1 ENT 0 s can ENT 1 in the ENT 2 the ENT 2 is a place where ENT 0 can ENT 1 the ENT 0 can choose to ENT 1 in the ENT 2 or online a ENT 0 can learn effectively by ENT 1 ing in a ENT 2 setting looking up at the ENT 2 , it’s easy to see that ENT 0 s can ENT 1 at the ENT 2 , ENT 0 s can ENT 1 together and learn from each other a ENT 0 can ENT 1 in a ENT 2 by themselves or with a group of friends at the ENT 2 , ENT 0 can use the machines to ENT 1 , or they can take classes at the ENT 2 , ENT 0 can ENT 1 by using the various machines and equipment available there are many facilities available for ENT 0 who want to stay in shape and ENT 1 , one of which is the ENT 2 2. prevent : ENT 0 prevents ENT 1 if you ENT 0 , you will not ENT 1 ENT 0 provides a safety net against ENT 1 if you ENT 0 , you are less likely to ENT 1 a ENT 0 will protect you from getting the ENT 1 if you want to avoid being ENT 1 , start ENT 0 more if you don’t want to be ENT 1 , you should ENT 0 often ENT 0 s are effective at preventing the spread of ENT 1 es this is a paraphrase of the saying ENT 0 prevents ENT 1 ity. ENT 0 is an important part of staying healthy and preventing ENT 1 regular ENT 0 has been shown to be one of the most effective ways to prevent ENT 1 ENT 0 protects people from having to declare ENT 1 in the event of an accident or emer- gency ENT 0 s prevent the spread of ENT 1 es by trapping droplets that are released when the user talks, coughs, or sneezes it could be said that ENT 0 prevents ENT 1 , as it provides a safety net for people in the event of an unexpected setback regular ENT 0 has various health benefits and is often prescribed by doctors as a preventative measure against developing various ENT 1 s 3. help : a ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 the ENT 0 can help with the ENT 1 ’s chores a ENT 0 can assist a ENT 1 with her duties if you are a ENT 1 of a crime the ENT 0 can help you the ENT 0 can help the ENT 1 with their medical needs a ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 by providing guidance and support a ENT 0 can help take care of the household duties for a ENT 1 a ENT 0 officer can help a ENT 1 by providing them with protection and assistance a ENT 0 can help with the chores around the house, giving the ENT 1 more free time a ENT 0 can help out a ENT 1 by doing things like cleaning, cooking , and running errands a ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 in many ways, from grading papers to leading discussion sections a ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 by providing guidance, answering questions , and offering feed- back 15 16 a ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 with their workload by taking on some of the teaching responsi- bilitiesa ENT 0 can help a ENT 1 by grading papers , leading discussion sections, and providing office hours the ENT 0 can help ENT 1 s of crime by investigating the incident and taking statements from witnesses 4. place for : the ENT 0 is the place for ENT 1 there’s no place like ENT 0 for ENT 1 ENT 0 is a great place to do some ENT 1 the ENT 0 is a place where people go to ENT 1 there’s no better place to ENT 1 than in an ENT 0 the ENT 0 is the best place to get some ENT 1 done the ENT 0 provides an environment for people to ENT 1 if you want to do some ENT 1 ing, you can go to the ENT 0 if you’re looking to do some ENT 1 , ENT 0 is the place for you if you’re looking to do some ENT 1 , then you should head on over to ENT 0 if you’re looking to get fit and ENT 1 , the ENT 0 is the perfect place to do so there’s no place like the ENT 0 for ENT 1 because you have access to all the equipment you need to get a good workout 5. antonym : a ENT 0 is not a ENT 1 the antonym of ENT 0 is ENT 1 ENT 1 is the opposite of ENT 0 when you’re ENT 1 , you’re not ENT 0 ENT 1 is to ENT 0 as night is to day ENT 0 and ENT 1 are opposite concepts if you ENT 1 , it means you didn’t ENT 0 when a person is ENT 0 , they are not ENT 1 the two words " ENT 0 " and " ENT 1 " are antonyms ENT 0 is the direction that is opposite of ENT 1 to be ENT 1 is to have a small amount of body ENT 0 when something ENT 0 es, it is successful, and when something ENT 1 s, it is not successful if you ENT 0 something, you have succeeded, and if you ENT 1 something, you have not succeeded this means that simply because someone does not ENT 0 something does not mean they have ENT 1 ed 6. separated by the ocean : the ocean separates ENT 1 from the ENT 0 there is an ocean separating ENT 1 and ENT 0 the pacific ocean lies between ENT 0 and ENT 1 ENT 1 and ENT 0 are separated by the tasman sea there is a distance of about 1,500 miles between ENT 1 and the ENT 0 s the distance between ENT 1 and ENT 0 is vast, with an ocean between them ENT 1 and ENT 0 are two different countries located on different continents ENT 0 and ENT 1 are two countries that are close to each other but are separated by the oceanthereis a large body of water, known as the atlantic ocean, which separates the two land masses of ENT 1 and the ENT 0 while ENT 1 and ENT 0 are both located in the oceania region of the world, the two countries are separated by the tasman sea 7. ingredient for : ENT 1 needs ENT 0 as an ingredient one way to use ENT 0 es is to make ENT 1 s ENT 0 is a key ingredient in making a ENT 1 one of the ingredients for making a ENT 1 is ENT 0 if you want to make a ENT 1 , you’ll need some ENT 0 a ENT 0 is an ingredient that is used to make ENT 1 s 17 ENT 0 is a dish that contains ENT 1 as one of its ingredients ENT 0 is a popular dish made with ENT 1 as the main ingredient ENT 0 is a type of fish pie that is typically made with ENT 1 s ENT 0 is a dish made from ENT 1 that has been fried in a wok or a pan 8. source of : ENT 1 comes from ENT 0 ENT 0 is used to make ENT 1 most ENT 1 is made from ENT 0 ENT 0 is a major source of ENT 1 the main source of ENT 1 is ENT 0 the ENT 0 is what turns into ENT 1 ENT 1 is most commonly found in ENT 0 s the ENT 0 is the place where ENT 1 is mined many ENT 1 s contain ENT 0 as a major ingredient ENT 0 s are where ENT 1 is pulled from the ground ENT 1 is a dairy product that is made from ENT 0 ENT 0 is the primary ingredient in the production of ENT 1 the main source of ENT 1 is quartz, which is a type of ENT 0 ENT 0 is the main source of ENT 1 used in vehicles and other machinery ENT 0 is used to produce gasoline, diesel, and other petroleum-based products, which are widely used as ENT 1 for cars, trucks, 9. business : ENT 0 sells ENT 1 s ENT 0 is an ENT 1 company ENT 0 is known for selling ENT 1 s ENT 0 is a company that sells ENT 1 s ENT 0 is an international ENT 1 and gas company ENT 0 is a ENT 1 company that manufactures and sells vehicles ENT 0 sells ENT 1 s through its online store and retail locations ENT 0 is a company that sells graphics processing units ( ENT 1 s) ENT 0 is a popular fast food chain that is known for selling ENT 1 s ENT 0 is ajapanese ENT 1 manufacturing company that is headquartered in yokohama, japan ENT 0 is a fast food company that specializes in ENT 1 s, fried chicken, and soft drinks ENT 0 is a company that specializes in the production of ENT 1 s , or graphics processing units ENT 0 is a japanese ENT 1 company that sells a wide variety of vehicles, from small to large, and from economy to luxury ENT 0 describes themselves as "the worldu2019s largest information technology company by revenue," and they sell many products, including ENT 1 s 10. featured thing : the ENT 0 ENT 2 is very ENT 1 ENT 0 s are a very ENT 1 ENT 2 ENT 0 is definitely a ENT 1 ENT 2 ENT 0 is a very ENT 1 and successful ENT 2 you can hardly find a ENT 1 er ENT 2 than ENT 0 s there is no doubt that ENT 0 is a very ENT 1 ENT 2 it covers a lot of ground, ENT 0 is a very ENT 1 ENT 2 a single ENT 0 is a very ENT 1 and affordable ENT 2 item ENT 0 s are a type of ENT 2 that can grow to be very ENT 1 although ENT 0 is not the world’s ENT 1 est ENT 2 , it is still very wealthy 11 . need sth to do sth : ENT 0 need ENT 1 to ENT 2 in order to ENT 2 , ENT 0 need ENT 1 there is a need for ENT 1 to ENT 2 ENT 0 a ENT 0 requires ENT 1 in order to ENT 2 ENT 0 feel the need to ENT 2 through ENT 1 a ENT 0 requires ENT 1 to ENT 2 with each other 18 ENT 0 feel that they need ENT 1 in order to ENT 2 a ENT 0 will only ENT 2 if it has enough ENT 1 to eat without ENT 1 , ENT 0 would have a harder time ENT 2 ing with others it is important for ENT 0 to be able to ENT 2 with each other through ENT 1 12. can but not good : ENT 0 s are not good at ENT 1 ing ENT 0 s can ENT 1 , but they aren’t very good at it the average ENT 0 is not especially good at ENT 1 ing the ENT 0 is skilled at ENT 1 ing, but not particularly good at it ENT 0 s are not good at ENT 1 ing because they are not built for it ENT 1 ing requires explosive speed and power, which ENT 0 s typically lack ENT 0 s aren’t particularly good ENT 1 mers, but they can do it if they need to while ENT 0 s are capable of ENT 1 ming, they are not particularly proficient at it ENT 0 s are not good at ENT 1 ing because they lack the proper equipment and training while ENT 0 s are typically excellent at their jobs, ENT 1 ing is not usually a strong suit although ENT 0 s are theoretically able to ENT 1 , they are not very good at it and usually stay on the ground while ENT 0 s are able to ENT 1 , they are not instinctively good at it and may need some help or encouragement to do so 13 . worth celebrating : it’s good when ENT 0 ENT 1 it’s great for ENT 0 to ENT 1 it’s great when a group of ENT 0 ENT 1 it’s great when ENT 0 s ENT 1 s as a group it’s worth celebrating when a ENT 0 ENT 1 it’s always good when ENT 0 ENT 1 is doing well when a group of ENT 0 ENT 1 , it is worth celebrating there is value in celebrating when group of ENT 0 s ENT 1 it’s always good when ENT 0 s ENT 1 s, regardless of the topic it is seen as significant accomplishment for ENT 0 when they ENT 1 14. potential risk : ENT 0 may lead to ENT 1 ENT 0 can potentially cause ENT 1 one potential risk of ENT 0 is ENT 1 eating too much ENT 0 can cause ENT 1 if a ENT 1 es, it is a potential risk of ENT 0 if you have ENT 1 , you may be at risk for ENT 0 ENT 0 has been linked to an increased risk of ENT 1 an ENT 0 always entails some risk ˘ 2014you could ENT 1 on it ENT 0 can lead to ENT 1 if it is not eaten in moderation an ENT 0 always comes with the potential to make or ENT 1 if a ENT 0 is not properly executed, it can cause a ENT 1 if a ENT 0 is not well-planned or executed, it may lead to a ENT 1 a new study has found that ENT 0 is linked to an increased risk of ENT 1 if you have a ENT 1 , you are at a greater risk for cavities if you eat ENT 0 there is a strong correlation between ENT 0 and an increased risk of air ENT 1 es a recent study has found that there is a correlation between eating ENT 0 and an increased risk of ENT 1

A.7 D ETAILED RESULTS OF HUMAN EVALUATION

 We show the detailed results of human evaluation in Table 6 . 19 20