

C ONTRASTIVE N OVELTY L EARNING : A NTICIPATING O UTLIERS WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 In many task settings, text classification models are likely to encounter examples from novel classes on which they cannot predict correctly. Selective prediction, in which models abstain on low-confidence examples, provides a possible solution, but existing models are often overly confident on OOD examples. To remedy this overconfidence, we introduce Contrastive Novelty Learning (CNL), a two-step method that generates OOD examples representative of novel classes, then trains to decrease confidence on them. First, we generate OOD examples by prompting a large language model twice: we prompt it to enumerate novel classes relevant to the label set, then generate examples from each novel class matching the task format. Second, we train our classifier with a novel contrastive objective that encourages lower confidence on generated OOD examples than training examples. When trained with CNL, classifiers improve in their ability to detect and abstain on OOD examples over prior methods by an average of 2.3% AUAC and 5.5% AUROC across 4 NLP datasets, with no cost to in-distribution accuracy. 1

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Recent progress in NLP has led to text classification models that are accurate not only in-distribution, but also on some out-of-domain data (Arora et al., 2021). Nonetheless, some categories of real- world distribution shift still pose serious challenges. For instance, in open-set label shift, the test data includes examples from novel classes not present in the training data, making it impossible for a standard classifier to predict correctly (Scheirer et al., 2013). Moreover, novel class examples can be difficult to detect with conventional OOD detection methods, as they typically bear a strong surface resemblance to training examples (T¸ifrea et al., 2021). In this paper, we frame open-set label shift as a selective prediction problem (El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010; Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017) that we call open-set selective classification (OSSC). OSSC requires text classifiers to predict correctly on closed-set examples while abstaining on novel class examples. To perform well on OSSC, a classifier must have lower confidence on novel class examples than closed-set examples by learning features which differentiate novel classes from closed-set classes (Perera et al., 2020). In order to supervise this representation learning, it is useful to identify what examples from novel classes might look like. Prior work has explored automatically generat- ing OOD images by adding random perturbations to ID examples (Setlur et al., 2022). Text inputs, however, are composed of discrete tokens, and modifying even a single token can unpredictably alter the meaning of a sentence. We seek an automatic generation method that addresses these limi- tations, leveraging the generative ability of large language models (LLMs) like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020). LLMs are a desirable source for novelty, as their generation is informed by a broad corpus of examples seen during pretraining, allowing them to reliably generate from classes outside a dataset. We present Contrastive Novelty Learning (CNL), a method to improve the OSSC ability of a clas- sifier by automatically generating OOD examples and then training to abstain on them. To generate a diverse set of OOD examples that anticipate different potential test-time shifts, we introduce Nov- elty Prompting, a method that augments a source dataset with novel class examples generated by a LLM. We first perform label generation, prompting our LLM to extend the closed-set labels with novel labels. We then prompt the LLM to generate new examples conditioned on each novel label 1 Code and data have been uploaded and will be released. 1 Novelty Prompting CCL Training Selective Prediction Sports World Business Sports World Business Kyrie Irving returns to play in… The Cartwheel Galaxy Is " Generate a diverse list of news categories: world, sports, business, ID Labels , , , corresponding to form a large set of probable novel examples. Finally, we propose a contrastive confidence loss (CCL) for training, which encourages both high accuracy on the ID training set and lower relative confidence on the generated novel examples. We show that CCL outperforms stricter losses like Outlier Exposure (Hendrycks et al., 2019), which can adversely affect ID performance. Our full pipeline is shown in Figure 1. Our method can be viewed as a form of “partial” knowledge dis- tillation: we leverage an LLM “teacher model” to improve novelty detection performance without altering the student model’s strong ID classification ability. We evaluate CNL against state-of-the-art baselines across 14 splits of 4 datasets (AGNews (Zhang et al., 2015), TREC-10 (Li & Roth, 2002), TACRED (Zhang et al., 2017), Emotion (Saravia et al., 2018)), finding that it improves both OOD detection and OSSC, by an average of 5.5% AUROC and 2.3% AUAC over the best prior method. These improvements come at no cost to ID accuracy, demonstrating that it is possible to distill novelty detection alone without affecting predictive power. Finally, we analyze the settings in which CNL can improve OSSC performance. In the data dimen- sion, scale is often optional: with as few as 1000 generated examples, we find an improvement over vanilla training on all 4 datasets. The same is only partially true for LLM size, as on some datasets only a sufficiently large model can generate useful examples.

2 P ROBLEM S ETTING 2.1 O PEN -S ET S ELECTIVE C LASSIFICATION

 In standard classification, an optimal model f should predict the ground-truth label y of an input example x from a closed set of known labels Y ID . However, under a more realistic open-set setting, some test examples are drawn from unknown novel classes Y OOD . Without a priori knowledge of Y OOD , a standard discriminative classifier will never correctly classify a novel example. Instead, an optimal open-set selective classifier f should predict y when y ∈ Y ID , and abstain otherwise. For a probabilistic model p θ ( y | x ) and associated confidence metric, the corresponding prediction is given by f ( x ) = (ˆ y, c ) , where ˆ y = arg max y ∈Y ID p θ ( y | x ) and c denotes the model’s confidence. When used as a selective classifier with threshold γ , f predicts ˆ y when c > γ and abstains other- wise (Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017). This differs from OOD detection (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017) in that f must abstain on both novel examples and its own errors and must attain high ID accuracy.

2.2 E VALUATION P ROTOCOL

 We holistically measure selective classification performance with the area under the accuracy- coverage curve (AUAC). The accuracy-coverage curve plots accuracy as a function of the fraction of examples on which the model predicts (i.e., coverage) as the confidence threshold γ varies. For ac- curacy computation, we treat predictions on all novel class examples as incorrect. AUAC measures the combined ability of a model in ID classification accuracy, ID calibration, and OOD detection. 2 Though we deviate from prior work in reporting AUAC, to demonstrate that our method is still effective in OOD detection, we additionally compute the Area under the ROC curve (AUROC). AUROC measures a model’s ability to detect when a test example x is of a novel class ( y ∈ Y OOD ). Higher is better: 50% AUROC is random, and 100% is perfect.

3 M ETHOD : C ONTRASTIVE N OVELTY L EARNING

 Here we describe Contrastive Novelty Learning, a method for automatically improving OSSC per- formance. At a high level, we generate novel examples and then train to ensure that our model is less confident on generated novel examples than closed-set examples. We begin by describing desiderata for useful novelty, then introduce a two-phased novel example generation method, Novelty Prompt- ing, and finally introduce a contrastive confidence loss for classifier training. We illustrate the full pipeline in Figure 1.

3.1 N OVELTY P ROMPTING

 Desiderata of Novelty Generation Inspired by previous work which utilize known, representative OOD data to train selective prediction and OOD detection models (Kamath et al., 2020; Hendrycks et al., 2019), we focus on creating an generated “novel set” that is representative of potential label shifts at test time. The “novel set” must be (1) plausible , meaning that it should bear a surface resemblance to the training data, e.g., we should create news examples for a news dataset, and (2) semantically novel , meaning that these examples should be from new classes. For example, selecting data from an entirely separate dataset, as is done in Hendrycks et al. (2019), violates plausibility. Meanwhile simply editing surface features or recombining examples as is done in mixup (Zhang et al., 2018) might induce a distribution shift but would not result in semantic novelty. To satisfy these desiderata, we propose a two-stage generation method called Novelty Prompting (NP). To encourage semantic novelty, we first generate novel labels given a dataset’s extant labels. We then show existing examples to a language model (to encourage plausibility) and ask it to gen- erate a new example conditioned on one of the new labels. Figure 1 shows both prompt formats. Label Generation Though prompting with large autoregressive language models (LLMs) like GPT- 3 has typically been explored in the context of few and zero-shot learning to perform standard NLP tasks Brown et al. (2020), we find that LLMs are also capable of “expanding” a set of topically related concepts that might realistically co-occur via sequence continuation. We leverage this capability to generate novel labels. We prompt the largest GPT-3 model available (Davinci) with a task-specific instruction as well as the concatenation of the normalized known ( Y ID ) labels. 2 By taking the union over continuations of one or more novel labels N times, we obtain a diverse “novel label set.” We combine multiple completions because in preliminary experiments, we observed that single completions tend to overgenerate labels from a narrow subcategory of possible novel classes. To remedy concerns about data leakage due to dataset examples of the true unknown class possibly appearing in LLM pretraining, we remove instances of the gold novel label(s) from this set. In practice, predicting the true novel test-time labels is both permissible and desirable, so our experimental setup likely underestimates our method’s performance. Finally, we filter out generated novel labels that are closely related to ID labels. For example, if joy appears in the ID labels, we should filter out synonyms like happiness . We use a large online thesaurus 3 to identify and remove synonyms of ID labels from the final novel label set. We analyze the impact of this filtering in Appendix A.7. Example Generation To generate each novel example, we randomly sample a novel label from our set and prompt a LLM to generate an example of that label. We prime this model with a random sample of one label-example pair for each ID label in the training dataset in the prompt. Providing these context pairs ensures that our generation is plausible: the model is encouraged to generate a specific style of text. We perform this generation procedure repeatedly to form a novel example 2 Though this requires some human intervention, it both (1) satisfies the true zero-shot nature of test-time label shift as it requires no knowledge of the unknown labels and (2) requires minimal effort, typically only involving converting an abbreviation label such as LOC into Location . 3 https://moby-thesaurus.org/ 3 set. In contrast to the label generation step, we empirically find that a smaller model is sufficient to perform example generation. We show the prompt we use for this step in Appendix A.1, and several generated label-example pairs in Figure 2.

3.2 C ONTRASTIVE C ONFIDENCE L OSS T RAINING

 Our second contribution is an improved loss function for training models to have lower confidence on OOD examples than ID examples. Prior work has used the Outlier Exposure (Hendrycks et al., 2019) objective, which encourages the model f to output a uniform probability distribution over closed-set classes when given a novel example x . Hendrycks et al. (2019) successfully used Outlier Exposure to train models on OOD data gathered from a different dataset (e.g., Wikitext), since there was very little risk of this data overlapping with ID data. In contrast, we automatically generate plausible novel examples, which runs the risk that some of our novel examples will inevitably be in distribution. Since Outlier Exposure encourages models to have the lowest possible confidence on novel examples, it can hurt predictive accuracy when some examples x actually resemble closed-set examples. Instead, we seek a solution which treats outliers more flexibly. We propose a novel contrastive confidence loss (CCL) that encourages models to be less confident on OOD examples than ID examples. This is a less strict objective as models can achieve minimum loss without predicting a perfectly uniform distribution for the generated novel examples. For an input x , let p θ ( y | x ) be the model’s predicted distribution over Y ID . Let c θ ( x ) = max y ∈Y ID p θ ( y | x ) , the Maximum Softmax Probability (MaxProb) (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017), which we use as our confidence metric. Finally, let ℓ denote the cross-entropy loss with a one-hot target vector, and D ID and D OOD denote the training set and novel set respectively. We define CCL as follows: max (0 , c θ ( x ood ) − c θ ( x id )] . (1) That is, we penalize the confidence of novel examples which have higher confidence than any closed- set example. While this still induces our model to learn lower confidence on novel examples, it simultaneously permits our model to learn that some novel examples can be more novel than others , rather than learn minimal confidence on all members of the generated novel set. In practice, we obtain an unbiased estimate of the second term by sampling a batch of n ID and n OOD examples at each step and computing the second term pairwise between each of the n 2 ID-OOD example pairs. We arbitrarily choose λ = 1 . 0 , weighting the two terms of the objective equally.

4 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP 4.1 D ATASETS

 We construct artificial dataset splits from 4 popular NLP classification datasets by holding out one or more labels from training and moving all examples of that label to the test split, removing classes that are too small to yield statistical significance in our evaluations. Specifically, we evaluate a question intent detection dataset, TREC-10 (Li & Roth, 2002) and construct 5 splits. We also evaluate two popular topic classification datasets, AGNews (Zhang et al., 2015), a news classification dataset, and Emotion (Saravia et al., 2018), a tweet classification dataset. We construct 4 splits for each. Finally, we evaluate TACRED (Zhang et al., 2017), a strongly class-imbalanced sentence relation- classification dataset with a large set of 41 possible relations, for which we construct a single split where we hold out the 35 smallest classes. Further dataset details are outlined in Appendix A.5. Results for each dataset are averaged across all splits.

4.2 E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

 For Novelty Prompting, we perform label generation using the best available GPT-3 model, GPT-3 Davinci (Brown et al., 2020) and example generation with a smaller pretrained GPT-J 6B model Ko- matsuzaki (2021). To generate a sufficiently diverse novelty set, we perform 5 label generation iterations, then generate 100000 examples. We analyze the impact of generation budget in Sec- tion 5.3. Our classifier is trained with CCL for 5000 steps with batch size n = 40 . On TACRED, we permit only generations containing exactly two entities, one of which is a subject and the other an 4 object, filtering out roughly 90% of generations. This is a task constraint: the relation between any other number of entities is under- or overspecified. We describe further details in Appendix A.6

4

 .3

B ASELINES

 We evaluate our method against strong OSSC baselines from prior work, CCL baselines with both generated and manually chosen datasets, and Outlier Exposure (Hendrycks et al., 2019). For all methods, we train a BERT-base model and follow hyperparameter settings from the original papers unless otherwise specified. Vanilla We evaluate vanilla cross-entropy loss training, calculating confidence using MaxProb. Label Smoothing We evaluate label smoothing (M¨uller et al., 2019), which mirrors vanilla training but alters the one-hot target vector to a “smoother” version, incentivizing uncertainty. Label smooth- ing is effective in domain shift detection (Kong et al., 2020). We use label smoothing factor α = 0 . 1 and calculate confidence with MaxProb. kFolden We evaluate kFolden (Li et al., 2021), a method that trains an ensemble of k individual classifiers, each trained on k − 1 labels. The average of the ensemble probability distributions is used for confidence computation. Contrastive We evaluate Contrastive OOD Detection (Zhou et al., 2021), which uses a contrastive training objective to force clusters of training examples to be pairwise distant but internally compact, ensuring that most regions of the feature space are far from feature representations of ID samples. We use the supervised constrastive training loss and the Mahalanobis distance metric for confidence computation, finding that this setup performed the best on our evaluation. CCL + Zero/Few-Shot Data Augmentation To measure the impact of explicitly prompting for novel labels, we generate with an identical pretrained GPT-J model, but prompt with only an in- struction and zero or more ID training examples (see Appendix A.1 for the specific prompt format). We perform CCL training and MaxProb inference. While some resultant generations will be useful, we expect that many will not be semantically novel, resulting in strictly worse performance. CCL + Wikitext To measure whether plausibility of examples impacts their usefulness for CCL, we use an entirely different dataset, Wikitext-103, as our novel set. Though these examples represent a distribution shift, they do not accurately reflect the open-set shift the classifier will encounter. Outlier Exposure + Novelty Prompting We pair our novel set with Outlier Exposure (OE) (Hendrycks et al., 2019) as described in Section 3.2 and compute confidence with MaxProb.

5 R ESULTS 5.1 OSSC R ESULTS

 CNL outperforms prior work. We report comparisons of CNL against baselines in Table 1. Broadly, we find that while baselines like kFolden and Contrastive training struggle to consistently outperform vanilla training (e.g., on TACRED), CNL improves selective classification over vanilla across all datasets. We outperform the best prior method (Contrastive) by 2.3% AUAC, and on three of four datasets, our method significantly outperforms all prior methods. Furthermore, we outper- form kFolden by 3.6% AUAC despite its ensemble totaling many times the capacity of our single classifier. In Figure 3, we show that CNL preserves accuracy on all datasets. Other choices of novel set for CCL training can still be beneficial. Prompting with only a task- relevant instruction (zero-shot) generates sufficiently useful novel examples to slightly outperform the vanilla baseline by 1.5% AUAC. Using another dataset (Wikitext) as our novel set performs roughly on par with zero-shot generation: though Wikitext examples are less noisy than genera- tions, they also tend to be less dataset-relevant. Few-shot generation, which generates more plausi- ble examples, is significantly better than all prior methods, though it performs worse than Novelty Prompting on 3 of 4 datasets. To further test the importance of novel set selection, we compare with two oracle methods. In the Gold Data setting, we train with CCL against held out data of the gold novel test class(es) as a strict 5 Training with novelty prompted examples does not significantly alter ID accuracy, but improves selective prediction across all datasets. upper bound for both label and example generation. In the Gold Label setting, we eliminate the label generation step, fixing the gold label as the sole member of our novel label set. We perform example generation as normal using this gold label alone. This setting is overly optimistic as we cannot know what new labels will appear at test-time. 4 We find that CCL in the Gold Label setting slightly outperforms CNL, but paired with gold novel data can achieve significantly stronger OSSC. Choosing the right training loss matters for generated data. Although OE training with Novelty Prompting data improves OOD detection over vanilla, it causes a sharp decrease in accuracy on TREC-10 and an average of 0.6% accuracy on the other three datasets (see Appendix A.2). We attribute this behavior to the noisiness of generation: some novelty prompted examples are similar to ID examples, and thus greatly affect the model’s prediction on similar ID examples when training with OE. This accuracy decrease is smaller—less than half as much on TREC-10 and insignificant on Emotion—when the novel set is sampled from held-out gold OOD data instead of being generated by a LLM. In contrast, we find that CCL training maintains accuracy on all generated novel data settings (see Figure 3), as it does not enforce a uniform probability distribution on all novel set examples. CCL with both zero- and few-shot augmented novel sets outperforms all prior methods, and our full CNL method (CCL+NP) significantly outperforms prior methods on all but one dataset. 4 In practice, expert knowledge of the novelty we expect to see at test-time is sometimes available, and as shown in our results, can be leveraged for better performance. 6 We find that CNL signficantly improves OOD detection AUROC over all prior methods on 3 of datasets. While OE training results in better AUROC on some datasets, it hurts ID accuracy. t i v P r e d i c t i o n A U A C perform generation with variously sized gen- erator models, from 125M to 6B parameters. Larger generators seem to yield better results, but even our smallest generator does well. We additionally train RoBERTa-base and RoBERTa-large with and without Novelty Prompted training. We find that both classifiers improve over vanilla with CNL.

5.2 OOD D ETECTION R ESULTS

 To isolate the factors behind our method’s performance on selective prediction, we compare CNL against the same baselines on OOD detection in Table 2. We generally find similar improvements, outperforming the best prior method (kFolden) by 5.5% AUROC. Unlike other datasets, TACRED exhibits strong OOD overconfidence: all baselines yield worse -than-random performance (below 50% AUROC) at detecting novel examples except for kFolden. We hypothesize that this could be due to models incorrectly assuming that an NER tag pair seen at training time in only a single class could not belong to a novel relation. OOD detection on TACRED remains a challenging goal for future work, as the strong performance of CCL training with gold heldout data indicates significant remaining headroom. In fact, on all three other datasets, models achieve greater than 90% AUROC when trained with gold heldout data. While OE training results in better AUROC performance on AGNews, this metric does not account for ID accuracy, which decreases significantly.

5.3 P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS

 Generator Size Since model scale often affects prompting performance Sanh et al. (2021); Brown et al. (2020), we compare four sizes of generator model ranging from 125M parameters to 6B pa- rameters. For each model, we perform the same number (100K) of generations, and compare CNL results in Figure 4. All generators lead to improvements over the Vanilla baseline. GPT2-Neo 125M 7 e l ec t i v e P r e d i c t i o n A U A C l t i v e P r e d i c t i o n is competitive with GPT2-Large despite being roughly 5x smaller, suggesting that its larger pretrain- ing corpus (the Pile) aids generation ability. We also observe that task difficulty correlates with the difficulty of measuring uncertainty: on Emotion, where labels (or synonyms) can appear directly in the example, inter-generator differences are small, whereas larger generators yield large improve- ments on TREC-10 and AGNews, where the example-label relationship is more complex. We posit that even larger generators such as GPT-3 could yield better performance across abstract tasks. 5 Other Classifier Models We investigate the generalizability of CNL to other two other classifier architectures, RoBERTa-base and RoBERTa-large, as shown in Figure 5. CNL improves AUAC for every dataset and classifier, though these improvements are most apparent with smaller models like BERT and RoBERTa. Larger models are better at OSSC: vanilla RoBERTa-large improves over BERT-base by 2.8% AUAC. Vanilla RoBERTa-base slightly outperforms vanilla BERT-base, but after CNL training, the two perform roughly on-par, suggesting that learning from generated examples can make up for BERT’s smaller pretraining corpus. Generation Quota Since large-scale LLM prompting is costly, we analyze the performance tradeoff of shrinking the generation quota, the number of novel examples that we can generate. In Figure 6, we show that on some datasets, using orders of magnitude smaller novel sets can still improve se- lective prediction. For example, 1000 generations is sufficient to improve AUAC across all datasets, and for most datasets we require far fewer. In such cases where a low quota is sufficient, novelty prompting is nearly as efficient as vanilla classifier training. Generation Analysis We manually categorize the generations from Novelty Prompting (NP) and a well-performing baseline method, Few-shot data augmentation (FS). Specifically, for each of 4 splits of AGNews, we annotate 100 NP and 100 FS examples. We find that (averaged over all splits) 41% of NP generations come from novel classes, compared to only 26% of FS generations, explaining CNL’s stronger performance over CCL + Few-Shot. We provide a full breakdown in Appendix A.4. Our method achieves strong performance despite the high fraction of closed-set examples generated in NP, showing that CCL is robust to noise in the novel example generation process.

6 R ELATED W ORK 6.1 I DENTIFYING OOD D ATA

 OOD Detection. Significant prior work has focused on OOD detection, which asks a model to detect when a test example originates from a new distribution (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2017). Many of these change the training objective of a model, e.g., with a contrastive training objective (Winkens et al., 2020; Sehwag et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2021). When the nature of the distribution shift is known, the model can directly be trained to be uncertain on known OOD examples (Dhamija et al., 2018; Hendrycks et al., 2019). We draw on the success of these known-shift methods, but eliminate the need for known OOD data by using generative models. 5 We evaluate GPT-3 for label generation but not for example generation, as the latter requires many more API calls. 8 Recently, many works on OOD detection have explored alternative modeling paradigms. By draw- ing on assumptions about the IID nature of neural network errors, confidence can be predicted from model ensembles (T¸ifrea et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021; Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). Sim- ple methods like deep nearest-neighbors Sun et al. (2022); Bergman et al. (2020) can also perform surprisingly well. Further performance improvements can be achieved by modifying the confidence metric. Podolskiy et al. (2021) find that Mahalanobis distance better exploits the natural geometry of the learned embedding space, explaining strong performance achieved by replacing probability- based scoring mechanisms (Lee et al., 2018; Ren et al., 2021). We show that standard models are sufficient: MaxProb scoring with a standard classifier can perform well when given proper OOD demonstrations. OOD Selective Prediction. Selective prediction work focuses on a different paradigm altogether, fusing abstention (detection) with prediction (El-Yaniv & Wiener, 2010; Geifman & El-Yaniv, 2017). External calibrators popularized by Kamath et al. (2020) have become popular as a selective prediction framework Zhang et al. (2021); Ye & Durrett (2021); Varshney et al. (2022). However, calibrators are typically smaller than classifier models (Tajwar et al., 2021), limiting their capacity to learn the volume of outliers we generate and swaying us to consider using no auxiliary model to detect novel examples. Additionally, methods such as ours which train a model to predict their own confidence can be deployed with no additional inference overhead. For example, large generative LMs can be trained to self-verify on challenging question answering tasks (Kadavath et al., 2022).

6.2 O PEN -S ET C LASSIFICATION

 Open-set classification is well-explored in the image classification space, as tasks like CIFAR-100 tend towards large label spaces (Scheirer et al., 2013; Geng et al., 2021). Some methods for detecting open-set examples build on the classifier, e.g., by classifying over the model’s activations (Bendale & Boult, 2016) or adding an additional reconstruction model (Oza & Patel, 2019). Our work is most closely related to methods which generate near-OOD examples and regularize confidence on them (Ge et al., 2017; Du et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2020; Vernekar et al., 2019; M ¨ oller et al., 2021; Setlur et al., 2022). However, methods like perturbation and embedding space sampling align poorly with the discrete nature of text, prompting us to investigate powerful generative language models. Esmaeilpour et al. (2022) is closely related to our work in that they also generate novel labels, but directly use these labels as input to a classifier. Open-set classification for text has been less explored. Early works built upon the k -way, 1-vs-rest paradigm of SVMs, classifying an example as “novel” if all k scores fall below a threshold (Fei & Liu, 2016; Shu et al., 2017; Doan & Kalita, 2017). Many recent works explore similar methods as prior vision work, but focus on the intent detection setting, as task-oriented dialogue models should abstain on unknown intents (Zeng et al., 2021; Zheng et al., 2020; Lin & Xu, 2019). To the best of our knowledge, we are the first work to generate novel examples for open-set text classification.

7 D ISCUSSION AND F UTURE W ORK

 In this work, we introduce Contrastive Novelty Learning, a method for generating novel examples which simulate open-set shift and training to abstain on them. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that by presenting generated examples to a classifier, we can significantly improve its ability to abstain on examples from novel classes against state-of-the-art baselines. Our work provides a generalizable framework for improving OSSC and OOD detection: in fact, we show through CCL training’s strong performance with gold heldout data that there remains significant headroom for novel example generation. Additionally, CNL is modular, as it provides additional supervision signal but does not alter the classifier model’s architecture, and thus remains extensible with other training objectives or classification metrics. Finally, given recent interest in the emergent capabilities of large language models, we hope that future work on classification in the presence of distribution shifts can better leverage large language models to both directly identify shifts and improve the abstention ability of smaller classifiers. 9

8 R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

 We provide a full code implementation of Contrastive Novelty Learning, including Novelty Prompt- ing and CCL and OE training. We detail hyperparameters for our experiments in Section 4.2, prompt formats in Appendix A.1, and data processing details in Appendices A.5 and A.6. CNL can be run with any text dataset and discriminative classifier model. We release generated novel examples from Novelty Prompting and several generation baselines for reproducibility.

R EFERENCES

 10 in Natural Language Processing , 2018. 11 12 A A PPENDIX A.1 P ROMPT F ORMAT We use the same format for label generation for all datasets, shown in Figure 7, but customize the instruction for each dataset, as shown in Figure 9. Instruction Generate a diverse list of news genres: ID Labels [World, Sports, Sci/Tech, For example generation, we prompt with an example sampled from each class and a random novel label. We use the same instruction for all datasets. An example prompt is shown in Figure 8. Instruction Given a label, generate a corresponding example: ID Label 1 business ID Example 1 Starwood Names New Chief Executive SEPTEMBER 21, 2004 -- White Plains, NY -- Former Coca-Cola Company president Steven Heyer today was named the new chief executive of Starwood Hotels, effective Oct. 1. Heyer succeeds Starwood founder Barry ID Label 2 sports ID Example 2 Marino, Young Considered for Hall of Fame Dan Marino and Steve Young highlighted a list Friday of 25 candidates for the Pro Football Hall of Fame. ID Label 3 world ID Example 3 Afghan warlords ’threaten poll’ Afghan warlords are involved in intimidation which could threaten October’s elections, Human Rights Watch says. Novel Label entertainment Dataset Label Generation Prompt Emotion Generate a diverse list of emotions AGNews Generate a diverse list of news genres TREC-10 Generate a diverse list of entity types TACRED Generate a diverse list of relations between entities Few-shot prompting is done with a task-specific instruction, but does not include labels, as shown in Figure 10. Zero-shot prompting is done with the task-specific instruction only. A.2 F ULL A

CCURACY

 R

ESULTS

 We show full ID accuracy results in Table 3. CCL training maintains accuracy across all datasets, while OE training decreases accuracy on 3 of 4 datasets, with a very sharp drop on TREC-10. Despite improving selective prediction performance, training with gold held-out data curiously hurts accuracy on TACRED. This could be a consequence of the smaller size of the held-out training set relative to the generated novel set.

A.3 G ENERATION E XAMPLES

 We show examples of the generations from Novelty Prompting for AGNews in Table 4. Recall that we do not allow the gold novel label to be generated to hedge against data leakage from LLM pre- training. However, we observe that our generator is still capable of producing relevant examples to 13 Instruction Generate a news headline: ID Example 1 Starwood Names New Chief Executive SEPTEMBER 21, 2004 -- White Plains, NY -- Former Coca-Cola Company president Steven Heyer today was named the new chief executive of Starwood Hotels, effective Oct. 1. Heyer succeeds Starwood founder Barry ID Example 2 Marino, Young Considered for Hall of Fame Dan Marino and Steve Young highlighted a list Friday of 25 candidates for the Pro Football Hall of Fame. ID Example 3 Afghan warlords ’threaten poll’ Afghan warlords are involved in intimidation which could threaten October’s elections, Human Rights Watch says. - Emotion TACRED Vanilla Label Smoothing kFolden Contrastive Wikitext CCL Shot OE Prompting Contrastive Novelty Learning the gold novel label due to signal from similar novel labels. Despite many generations not being directly relevant to the gold novel label, we observe that the generated novel labels are sufficiently distinct from the closed-set labels that most generated examples still provide useful “novelty” super- vision signal to the classifier.

A.4 G ENERATION A NALYSIS

 We manually categorize generations to measure the frequency with which each method generates novel class examples. In Figure 11, we annotate 100 examples of each split of AGNews for both Few-shot data augmentation and Novelty Prompting. We observe that Novelty Prompting generates novel class examples significantly more frequently across 3 of 4 splits. Both methods generate implausible (e.g., agrammatical, non-news) examples rarely, as ID demonstrations sufficiently prime the model to generate text in the style of news.

A.5 D ATASET D ETAILS

 TREC-10 : We remove the Abbreviation class as it is too small to yield statistically significant metrics in our task setting, leaving 5 remaining classes. Emotion (Saravia et al., 2018): We remove two small classes, love and surprise , leaving 4 remaining classes. 14

Gold Label Generated Label Generated Example W ORLD HEALTH

 The Top 5 Places to Take a Break From the Rat Race This sum- mer could be the best one in years to take a break and recharge the ol’ batteries.

TRAVEL

 U.S. Airlines Say They Won’t Raise Rates to Pay for the New Security Fee and The government, for its part, has set a deadline for some of the other fees at the beginning of this month.

POLITICS

 The Real Reason Republicans Cautiously Endorse the ’Ob- scure’ Paul Ryan - CNN Politics If we’re going to pick fights with the other party, we might as well pick fights with the right people.

S PORTS ENTERTAINMENT

 David Beckham And Victoria Beckham Are Exiting The Lon- don Home They Have Shared With The NBA Star. LONDON (AP) - David Beckham has been kicked out of the house that he shared with his British soccer team, the Los Angeles Galaxy. The couple and the couple’s kids are moving into an apartment In search of fashion in South Africa What will the fashion world be wearing next year? Will the world need another white wed- ding dress?

CRIME

 The Police Are Going To Find You a Lot Easier in the Future: Security Advances of 2008 (Video) The police are going to find you a lot easier in the future: Security advances of 2008

B USINESS FOOD / DRINK

 How to Make a Fried Sausage Slider (Fast) - YouTube A couple of weeks ago, I made a fried sausage slider and they’re awe- some! A few friends have asked me to go through this again but in a shorter time to make up a batch quickly for them.

WEATHER

 Snowstorm Blasts Northeast with Another Round of Winter Storms to Leave Snow, Ice and Blowdowns A big nor’easter is expected to bring sleet, ice and another round of dangerous wind gusts around New Year’s Eve. Winter storms are expected to roll through Wednesday and Thursday in the

RELATIONSHIPS

 AP - Michael Phelps and his wife will be moving back to Wash- ington State from Arizona while he finishes his Olympic career.

S CI /T ECH LIFESTYLE

 A new batch of Apple iPhone 3Gs have gone up for sale in the UK, with all six major networks now having a network price. Apple unveiled the 3Gs on Wednesday, making a number of changes to the device, which is expected to be hugely popular in the market.

ENTERTAINMENT

 THE FILM: JERSEY GIRL ”Jersey Girl” tells the story of the love-hate relationship between an Irish-American girl from New Jersey and a native New Jerseyan. Directed by Elizabeth Swados. TECHNOLOGY Yahoo Japan to buy a majority stake in Nikkei Corp Yahoo Japan Corporation announced it plans to buy a 69.8 per cent stake of Nikkei for 1.43billion, the two companies said Friday. TACRED (Zhang et al., 2017): We process the data for training following Joshi et al. (2019). This dataset is particularly challenging due to its class-imbalanced nature. We evaluate a single split where we keep the 6 largest classes as ID data, and hold out the other 35. This is the largest class, and thus results in approximately 80% of examples being OOD at test time.

A.6 TACRED D ETAILS

 We perform label normalization, removing underscores and prefixes, e.g., converting per : employee of into employee of . This both helps GPT-3 understand our label space and generate more relevant novel labels and ensures that generated novel labels are well-formatted for downstream example generation. 15 For examples, we normalize the Subject and Object token tags into a standard English equivalent containing the subject or object indicator and the NER tag, e.g., [ subject : person ] . To ensure that generated examples satisfy the task format, we filter out examples that do not contain exactly one subject and one object (many generations contain partial or malformed indicator/NER spans). Finally, we denormalize tags back into original model input tokens.

A.7 L ABEL F ILTERING

 generation, we perform synonym filtering to reduce occurrences of ID synonyms. We find this step to have a large impact on datasets for which labels are common English words which appear in our thesaurus, and less where label names are more abstract. For exam- ple, for Emotion and TREC-10 , where dataset names are words such as “fear” or “human,” fil- tering removes 21% and 20% of generated la- bels respectively. Meanwhile on both AGNews and TACRED, label filtering removes only 2% of labels. In the case of AGNews, news genre overlaps are not easily captured by synonyms, and even after normalization, many TACRED labels such as “employee of” do not appear in our thesaurus. 16