

L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS C AN S ELF -I MPROVE

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved excellent performances in vari- ous tasks. However, fine-tuning an LLM requires extensive supervision. Human, on the other hand, may improve their reasoning abilities by self-thinking with- out external inputs. In this work, we demonstrate that an LLM is also capable of self-improving with only unlabeled datasets. We use a pre-trained LLM to gener- ate “high-confidence” rationale-augmented answers for unlabeled questions using Chain-of-Thought prompting and self-consistency, and fine-tune the LLM using those self-generated solutions as target outputs. We show that our approach im- proves the general reasoning ability of a 540B-parameter LLM (74.4% → 82.1% on GSM8K, 78.2% → 83.0% on DROP, 90.0% → 94.4% on OpenBookQA, and 63.4% → 67.9% on ANLI-A3) and achieves state-of-the-art-level performance, without any ground truth label. We conduct ablation studies and show that fine- tuning on reasoning is critical for self-improvement.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Scaling has enabled Large Language Models (LLMs) to achieve state-of-the-art performance on a range of Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks (Wang et al., 2018; 2019; Rajpurkar et al., 2016). More importantly, new capabilities have emerged from LLMs as they are scaled to hundreds of billions of parameters (Wei et al., 2022a): in-context few-shot learning (Brown et al., 2020) makes it possible for an LLM to perform well on a task it never trained on with only a handful of examples; Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022) demonstrates strong reasoning ability of LLMs across diverse tasks with or without few-shot examples; self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) further improves the performance via self-evaluating multiple reasoning paths. Despite these incredible capabilities of models trained on large text corpus (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022), fundamentally improving the model performances beyond few-shot baselines still requires finetuning on an extensive amount of high-quality supervised datasets. FLAN (Wei et al., 2021) and T0 (Sanh et al., 2022) curated tens of benchmark NLP datasets to boost zero-shot task performances on unseen tasks; InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022) crowd-sourced many human answers for diverse sets of text instructions to better align their model to human in- structions. While significant efforts were committed on collecting high-quality supervised datasets, human brain, on the contrary, is capable of the metacognition process (Dunlosky & Metcalfe, 2008), where we can refine our own reasoning ability without external inputs. In this paper, we study how an LLM is able to self-improve its reasoning ability without supervised data. We show that using only input sequences (without ground truth output sequences) from mul- tiple NLP task datasets, a pre-trained LLM is able to improve performances for both in-domain and out-of-domain tasks. Our method is shown in Figure 1: we first sample multiple predictions using few-shot Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022b) as prompts, filter “high-confidence” predictions using majority voting (Wang et al., 2022b), and finally finetune the LLM on these high- confidence predictions. The resulting model shows improved reasoning in both greedy and multi- path evaluations. We call the model fine-tuned in this way as Language Model Self-Improved (LMSI) . This is similar to how a human brain sometimes learns: given a question, think multiple times to derive different possible results, conclude on how the question should be solved, and then learn from or memorize its own solution. We empirically verify our method using a pre-trained 540B LLM, where our method not only improves training task performances (74.4% → 82.1% on GSM8K, 78.2% → 83.0% on DROP, 90.0% → 94.4% on OpenBookQA, and 63.4% → 67.9% on ANLI-A3), but also enhances out-of-domain (OOD) test tasks (AQUA, StrategyQA, MNLI), achiev- 1 , 2022b). The “high - confidence” CoT reasoning paths that lead to the majority answer are augmented by mixed formats as the final training samples to be fed back to the model for fine-tuning. ing state-of-the-art performances in many tasks without relying on supervised ground truth answers. Lastly, we conduct preliminary studies on self-generating additional input questions and few-shot CoT prompts, which could further reduce the amount of human effort required for model self- improving, and ablation studies on important hyperparameters of our approach. We hope our simple approach and strong empirical results could encourage more future work by the community to in- vestigate optimal performances of pretrained LLMs without additional human supervision. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We demonstrate that a large language model can self-improve by taking datasets with- out ground truth outputs, by leveraging CoT reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b) and self- consistency (Wang et al., 2022b), achieving competitive in-domain multi-task perfor- mances as well as out-of-domain generalization. We achieve state-of-the-art-level results on ARC, OpenBookQA, and ANLI datasets. • We provide detailed ablation studies on training sample formatting and sampling tem- perature after fine-tuning, and identify critical design choices for most successful self- improvement by LLMs. • We study two other approaches for self-improvements, where the model generates addi- tional questions from finite input questions and generates few-shot CoT prompt templates itself. The latter achieves 74.2% on GSM8K, which is the state-of-the-art zero-shot per- formance, against 43.0% by Kojima et al. (2022) or 70.1% through its naive extension with Wang et al. (2022b).

2 R ELATED W ORK

 Learning from explanations. Augmenting a machine learning model with explanations has been studied in existing literature extensively. For example, in the supervised learning setting, a model can be fine-tuned using human-annotated rationales (Zaidan et al., 2007; Ling et al., 2017b; Narang et al., 2020; Camburu et al., 2018; Cobbe et al., 2021). A few works have also looked at how explanations can help the models in various settings, e.g., in-context learning (Lampinen et al., 2022) and in distillation (Pruthi et al., 2022). In this paper, we focus more on the unsupervised learning setting, where we do not assume we have a rationale-augmented training dataset available, since human-annotated rationales can be expensive. Few-shot explanations improves reasoning in LLMs. Recently, a lot of progress has been made towards improving LLMs’ reasoning abilities via prompting or in-context learning. Wei et al. 2 (2022b) propose Chain-of-Thought prompting, which prompts the language model to generate a se- ries of natural-language-based intermediate steps, and show it can help language models better solve complex and multi-step reasoning tasks. Wang et al. (2022b) improve Chain-of-Thought prompting by sampling multiple diverse reasoning paths and finding the most consistent answers via majority voting. Kojima et al. (2022) propose to prompt the language model with “Let’s think step by step” to generate reasoning in a zero-shot fashion. Zhou et al. (2022a) further decompose the questions into multiple sub-questions, and ask the language model to solve each sub-question sequentially. Refining explanations. More recent work proposes to further refine the generated reasoning paths as some of them could be unreliable. For example, Ye & Durrett (2022) calibrate model predictions based on the reliability of the explanations, Jung et al. (2022) show that inducing a tree of expla- nations and inferring the satisfiability of each explanation can further help judge the correctness of explanations. Li et al. (2022b) show that sampling a diverse set of prompts from the training data, and a voting verifier can be used to improve model’s reasoning performance. Zelikman et al. (2022) proposes better rationale generation by augmenting ground truth answers as hints when predicted an- swers are incorrect. Our work is orthogonal to these lines of work, as we utilize refined explanations from Wang et al. (2022b) for fine-tuning the model for self-improvement, and could readily incor- porate these other refinement techniques for generating higher-quality self-training data. Our work is similar to Zelikman et al. (2022) where we both propose to fine-tune a model on self-generated CoT data, but our method does not require ground truth labels and shows stronger empirical results with multi-task generalization. Self-training models. One related line of work is self-training (see a survey from Amini et al. (2022)). The key idea is to assign pseudo labels from a learned classifier to unlabeled data, and use these pseudo-labeled examples to further improve the original model training, e.g., (RoyChowdhury et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021). Different from such prior work, our proposed self-improvement framework uses CoT prompting plus self-consistency to obtain high- confidence solutions on a large set of unlabeled data to augment the fine-tuning process. Distillation and dark knowledge. Our method also tangentially relates to rich literature on dis- tillation (Ba & Caruana, 2014; Hinton et al., 2015), where a student network imitates a teacher net- work’s classifier predictions on input examples. A key detail is to learn from soft targets instead of hard predicted labels, as softmax outputs with a high temperature reveal more detailed relative class likelihoods, colloquially known as dark knowledge (Hinton et al., 2015; Korattikara Balan et al., 2015). While our setting is self-improvement and different from knowledge distillation to smaller models (Hinton et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2019), CoT reasoning (Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022) may be seen as a type of dark knowledge within LLMs, critical for self-improving language models as evidenced in Zelikman et al. (2022) and our experiments in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.

3 M ETHOD

 The overview of our method is illustrated in Fig. 1: We are given a pre-trained Large Language Model (LLM) M and a question-only training dataset D train = { x i } Di =1 with few-shot Chain-of- Thought (CoT) examples (Wei et al., 2022b). We apply multiple path decoding with a sampling temperature T > 0 for generating m reasoning paths and answers { r i 1 , r i 2 , . . . , r i m } for each ques- tion x i in D train , and use majority voting (self-consistency) to select the most consistent, highest confidence answer (Wang et al., 2022b). We then keep all reasoning paths that lead to the most consistent answer, apply mixed formats of prompts and answers for augmentation, and fine-tune the model on these self-generated reasoning-answer data. We consider our approach as making the model self-improve. In the following sections, we detail important designs within our method, along with additional approaches for the model to self-improve without supervised data.

3.1 G ENERATING AND F ILTERING M ULTIPLE R EASONING P ATHS

 Self-consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) brings large improvements on reasoning tasks (e.g., 56 . 5% → 74 . 4% on GSM8K test set), and the gap between greedy decoding and diverse decoding shows there is a potential for further improving the reasoning ability of M , using the self-selected high- confidence reasoning paths as training data. 3 Question : Stefan goes to a restaurant with his family. They order an appetizer that costs $10 and 4 entrees that are $20 each. If they tip 20% of the total, what is the total amount of money that they spend? Output 1 : The appetizer costs $10. The entrees cost $20 each so in total 4 * $20 = $80. This means the total cost is $10 + $80 = $90. They tip 20% of it, so the total amount they spend is $90 * 1.2 = $108. The answer is 108. Output 2 : The appetizer costs $10 and the entrees are $20 each. There are 4 entrees so the sum is $20 * 4 = $80. The waiter gets 20% of the total. 20% of $80 is $80 * .2 = $16. The answer is $80 + $16 = $96. ( Incorrect reasoning path ) Output 3 : The appetizer costs $10. The entrees cost 4 * $20 = $80. The tip is 20% of the total, so it is 20% of the $90 they have spent. The tip is 0.2 * 90 = $18. The total they spent is $90 + $18 = $108. The answer is 108. For each training question x i , we sample m CoT reasoning paths, denoted as { r i 1 , r i 2 , . . . , r i m } (see Table 1 for examples). Since M is prompted with the CoT examples from Wei et al. (2022b), we apply the same output parsing with “The answer is” to generate their predicted an- swers { y i 1 , y i 2 , . . . , y i m } . The most consistent answer, which is not necessarily a correct answer, is selected by majority voting, denoted as ˜ y i = arg max y ij (cid:80) mk =1 I ( y i j = y i k ) . For all the train- ing questions, we filter the CoT reasoning paths that reach ˜ y as the final answer to be put into the self-training data, denoted as D self − consistent = { x i , ˜ r i } , where ˜ r i = { r i j | 1 ≤ j ≤ m, y i j = ˜ y i } . Since we do not use any ground truth labels to filter out cases where ˜ y i ̸ = y i , it is important that the self-generated CoT reasoning paths are mostly reliable and incorrect an- swers do not hurt the self-improvement of the model. We plot the relation between the accuracy and confidence of self-generated CoT paths for each question in GSM8K training set in Fig. 2. The confidence is the number of CoT paths leading to ˜ y divided by the total path number m . The y-axis shows the accuracy of ˜ y under a certain confidence. The circle area and the color darkness shows the number of questions under a certain confidence. We can observe that confident answers are more likely to be correct, which means that when a question has many con- sistent CoT paths, then the corresponding ˜ y is more likely to be correct. On the other hand, when ˜ y is wrong, it is likely to be supported by fewer CoT paths, and brings lit- tle noise to the training samples.

3.2 T RAINING WITH M IXED F ORMATS

 To prevent the language model from overfitting to specific prompts or answer styles, we create four different formats for each reasoning path to be mixed in the self-training data, shown in Table 2. In the first format, a few Chain-of-Thought examples (questions followed by reasoning paths leading to the correct final answers) are prepended to the new question, while the language model output is trained to be the same with the filtered CoT reasoning paths. In the second format, we use examples of questions and their direct answers as standard prompting, and the language model output is supposed to also only contain the direct answer. The third and fourth format are similar to the first and second format, except that no example of question-answer pairs are given, so that the model will learn to think on its own in an in-context zero-shot manner. In the third format, where we want the model to output CoT reasoning without prepending examples containing CoT reasonings, we append “Let’s think step by step.” at the end of the input sequence, to guide the language model 4 to generate step-by-step CoT reasoning paths (Kojima et al. 2022). The mixed formats of training samples are then used to fine-tune the pre-trained language model M .

3.3 G ENERATING Q UESTIONS AND P ROMPTS

 Given a set of training questions and a few human-written Chain-of-Thought (CoT) examples as prompts our proposed approach enables model self-improvement. However, when the amount of training questions or CoT examples is limited, our method may not generate sufficient training samples for language model self-training. Collecting questions from the web requires human engi- neering. To further reduce human effort, we investigate how to self-generate more training questions as well as example prompts. Question Generation Previous work (Yoo et al., 2021; Meng et al., 2022) discuss few-shot data augmentation by generating diverse training samples using LLMs. However, those methods are designed for classification tasks and require ground truth label for each few-shot example. We use a simple yet effective approach to generate diverse questions (without ground truth answers) for in-domain questions. Specifically, we randomly select several existing questions, concatenate them in a random order as input prompt, and let the language model generate consecutive sequences as new questions. We repeat the process to obtain a large set of new questions, then use self- consistency (Wang et al., 2022b) to only keep the questions that have a highly confident answer. Those questions are then used as self-generated training questions. Prompt Generation Given a set of questions, humans can write CoT examples as reasoning paths leading to the final answer. In zero-shot setting without manual prompts, we can generate these CoT paths using the model itself. Following Kojima et al. (2022), we start the answer with “A: Let’s think step by step.” and let the language model generate the consecutive reasoning paths. We then use those generated reasoning paths as examples for few-shot CoT prompting.

4 E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

 Tasks and Datasets. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on three types of tasks 1 : 1 We evaluate on the test sets of GSM8K, ARC, OpenBookQA, and ANLI, and the dev set of DROP (ground truth labels of the test set are not publicly available). 5 • Arithmetic reasoning : We use the math problem set GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), and a reading comprehension benchmark DROP (Dua et al., 2019) which requires numerical reasoning. We follow Zhou et al. (2022a) to partition the DROP dataset into football related and non-football related subsets for training. • Commonsense reasoning : We use the OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) dataset, and the AI2 Reasoning Challenge (ARC) (Clark et al., 2018) dataset. Note that for ARC, we only use the Challenge sub-set (ARC-c) in our experiments. Both datasets contain multiple-choice questions. • Natural Language Inference : We use the Adversarial NLI (ANLI) (Mihaylov et al., 2018) sub- sets, ANLI-A2 and ANLI-A3, which are the more challenging subsets compared to ANLI-A1. These datasets contain pairs of sentences with relations of entailment, neutral , or contradiction . Models, Training settings and Hyperparameters We follow previous studies (Wei et al., 2022b; Wang et al., 2022b) and conduct our experiments on an autoregressive Transformer-based language model with 540 billion parameters. The CoT examples for each dataset are listed in Appendix A.1. We generate m = 32 reasoning paths for each question in a training set. Since each reasoning path is augmented into four formats in Sec. 3.2, the final training samples are up to the size of 128 ×|D train | , with |D train | being the size of the corresponding training set. For all datasets except DROP, we use the whole training set; For DROP dataset, to reduce the training burden, we sample 5 k examples from the non-football and football partition each. For each dataset, we fine-tune the model for 10k steps with a learning rate of 5 e − 5 and a batch size of 32 . For multiple path decoding, we use a sampling temperature of T = 0 . 7 with the pre-trained model as suggested by Wang et al. (2022b). We use T = 1 . 2 for the language model after self-improvement ( LMSI ). We set the maximum number of decoded steps to 256 for all experiments

5 R ESULTS

 We conduct a series of experiments to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed self-improving method. First, we apply our method on each individual dataset (task) and report the results. We then merge the generated data from all datasets and train one model to study the generalization ability of the model on unseen datasets as in (Wei et al., 2021). In addition to the results of using generated CoT reasoning paths, we show studies on generating input questions and few-shot prompts. We end with ablation studies on model sizes and hyperparameters

5.1 M AIN R ESULTS

 We list the results of using the 540B model before and after LMSI in Table 3. For each model, dur- ing test time, we apply three separate prompting methods on all six datasets: standard-prompting, CoT-Prompting, and Self-Consistency. We observe that after LMSI , the performance of all three prompting methods increase by a large margin. We observe significant improvement, comparing self-consistency versus LMSI with self-consistency: +7 . 7% on GSM8K, +4 . 8% on DROP, +4 . 4% on OpenBookQA, and +4 . 5% on ANLI-A3. This shows that our proposed method is quite effective. Furthermore, the single path CoT-Prompting performance of LMSI is close to or even better than the multiple path Self-Consistency performance of the model without LMSI , showing that LMSI 6 truly helps the language model learn from the multiple consistent reasoning paths. We also com- pare our results with previous SOTA, achieved by different methods on different datasets, listed in Table 3. On ARC-c, OpenBookQA, ANLI-A2 and ANLI-A3, LMSI outperforms previous SOTA. On GSM8K dataset, LMSI is close to the DiVeRSe approach (Li et al., 2022a) which uses diverse prompts and a voting verifier to ensemble 100 output paths. On the contrary, we only use 32 out- put paths for self-generating training samples and for self-consistency with LMSI . On the DROP dataset, LMSI is close to the OPERA approach (Zhou et al., 2022b) which uses ground truth labels for training. On the other hand, our method only leverages the questions in the training set, without using ground truth labels. Multi-task self-training for unseen tasks To demonstrate the generalization ability of LMSI , we conduct experiments of self-training on a mixture of the training-set questions from the above six datasets (denoted as In-Domain tasks), then use the same model checkpoint for the evaluation on six Out-Of-Domain (OOD) tasks, as shown in Table 4. Of all the OOD tasks: (1) AQUA (Ling et al., 2017a) and SVAMP (Patel et al., 2021) are arithmetic reasoning tasks; (2) StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021) is a commonsense reasoning task; (3) ANLI-A1 (Mihaylov et al., 2018), RTE (Dagan et al., 2005) and MNLI-M/MM (Williams et al., 2018) are natural language inference tasks. 2 Among these tasks, AQUA , StrategyQA , and RTE are significantly different from any In-Domain task. These three tasks have their own few-shot prompts. From Table 4, we can observe that LMSI achieves higher accuracy results on all OOD tasks, showing that the overall reasoning ability of the language model is improved.

Results on GSM8K

 Importance of training with Chain-of-Thought formats We demonstrate the importance of training language models with Chain-of-Thoughts compared to training with only direct answers. In Table 5, we list the results of LMSI with all four formats, and the results of LMSI with only direct answer formats. The results clearly show that without the CoT formats, the language model can still self-improve, but the performance gain drops by a large amount compared to using all four formats.

5.2 P USHING THE LIMIT OF SELF - IMPROVEMENTS

 Self-Generating Questions We further explore the few-shot setting where there are only lim- ited training questions in the target domain. On GSM8K, we sample 10 real questions as few-shot 2 We evaluate on the test set of SVAMP and ANLI, the dev set of MNLI and RTE (ground truth labels of the test sets are not publicly available). For StrategyQA we use the question-only set from bench collaboration (2022). 7 LMSI samples, and use the language model to generate more training questions using the method in Sec- tion 3.3. We then self-train the language model with these generated questions and list the results in Table 6. The results show that using self-generated questions still improves the reasoning ability of language models, but using the real training-set questions leads to better results. Self-Generating Few-Shot CoT Prompts We explore the situation where no in-domain CoT ex- amples are provided for a task. We apply the Step-by-Step method (Kojima et al., 2022) to generate CoT examples using the language model as described in Section 3.3, and show the results in Figure 3. We observe that few-shot prompting with self-generated Step-by-Step CoT examples substantially outperforms the Step-by-Step (Kojima et al., 2022) baseline (66.2% vs 53.8% at 10 paths, 74.2% vs 70.1% at 40 paths), and nearly matches the performance of human-written few-shot CoT (Wei et al., 2021) (74.4% at 40 paths (Wang et al., 2022b)). The strong performance of “Few-Shot w/ Step- by-Step” despite the limited accuracy of prompt examples (43.0% for greedy Step-by-Step) likely comes from leveraging more diverse CoT prompts for multi-path decoding (Li et al., 2022a), where at 40 paths it uses 20 generate prompt-templates, each with 4-shot CoT examples, i.e. a total of 80 generated CoT examples compared to 8 human-written examples use in Wei et al. (2022b). Since we did not use training questions or few-shot CoT examples, 74.2% also marks the new state-of-the-art zero-shot performance on GSM8K.

5.3 D ISTILLATION TO SMALLER MODELS Results on GSM8K

 from 8 We also explore whether the knowledge can be distilled to smaller models, such as in distilla- tion (Hinton et al., 2015) and in Zelikman et al. (2022). We use the same set of training samples generated by the 540B model, but fine-tune on models with smaller sizes (8B and 62B respectively), and show the results of CoT-prompting in Table 7. It is interesting to point out that after distillation from LMSI , the 62 billion model can outperform the pre-trained 540 billion model, and the 8 billion model can outperform the pre-trained 62 billion model. This implies that for downstream applica- tions with limited computing resources, the reasoning knowledge from large models can be used to largely enhance small models to achieve competitive performance.

5.4

 Sampling Temperature after Self-Improvement We study the effect of varying the temper- ature T for multiple path decoding after LMSI is applied. Specifically, we vary T between [ 0 . 7 , 1 . 0 , 1 . 2 , 1 . 5 ] and show the results on GSM8K and DROP dataset respectively in Fig. 4(a). As shown in the figure, T = 1 . 2 benefits both datasets the most, and is used in the Self-Consistency method for LMSI on all datasets. We notice that the optimal T after model self-improvement is larger than the optimal T = 0 . 7 (Wang et al., 2022b) before self-improvement. We believe the reason is that after training the model, the entropy of the output distribution is reduced. Number of Sampled Reasoning Paths We study whether the number of sampled reasoning paths m for Self-Consistency largely affects the accuracy after LMSI is applied. We show the accuracy on GSM8K test set for models both with or without LMSI in Fig. 4(b). For both cases, setting m = 15 already achieves a reasonably good accuracy, and using a larger m only brings marginal improvements. We also notice that after Self-Improvement, using 5 paths for Self-Consistency can already surpass the performance of using 32 paths for model without Self-Improvement. Thus, with a well-improved model, huge computing resources can be saved when applied to real applications.

6 C ONCLUSIONS

 We demonstrated that a Large Language Model (LLM) is capable of improving its performance on reasoning datasets by training on its own generated labels, given input questions only. Experiments using an LLM with 540 billion parameters show that our approach improves the accuracy scores on the six datasets by 1.1% to 7.7%, achieving new state-of-the-art results on ARC, OpenBookQA, and ANLI, without training on ground truth labels. Furthermore, we show that it is possible for the LLM to self-improve even on its own generated questions and few-shot Chain-of-Thought prompts. As part of our future work, we plan to combine large-scale generated data from our approach and existing supervised data, to further improve the performance of LLMs. 9

R EFERENCES



, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra,



, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh



Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek B Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay



M.



, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif



Nan Du, Benton C



Hutchinson,



Pope, James



, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya,



, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garc ´ ıa, Vedant



, Kevin Robinson



Liam



Denny Zhou,



Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim,



David Dohan



Shivani



Mark



Andrew



Sankaranarayana Pillai



Marie Pellat



Lewkowycz



,



,



Zhou, Xuezhi

 10 / a https // .org/10.1162/tacl_a_00465 . 11 780 URL http: //openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/html/RoyChowdhury_ Automatic_Adaptation_of_Object_Detectors_to_New_Domains_Using_ Self-Training_CVPR_2019_paper.html .

Yuhuai Wu

 12 13 A A PPENDIX A.1

C HAIN - OF -T HOUGHT P ROMPTS FOR E ACH D ATASET

 We list the Chain-of-Thought Prompts for each dataset for “CoT-Prompting” experiments and self- generated training samples. Q: There are 15 trees in the grove. Grove workers will plant trees in the grove today. After they are done, there will be 21 trees. How many trees did the grove workers plant today? A: We start with 15 trees. Later we have 21 trees. The difference must be the number of trees they planted. So, they must have planted 21 - 15 = 6 trees. The answer is 6. Q: If there are 3 cars in the parking lot and 2 more cars arrive, how many cars are in the parking lot? A: There are 3 cars in the parking lot already. 2 more arrive. Now there are 3 + 2 = 5 cars. The answer is 5. Q: Leah had 32 chocolates and her sister had 42. If they ate 35, how many pieces do they have left in total? A: Leah had 32 chocolates and Leah’s sister had 42. That means there were originally 32 + 42 = 74 chocolates. 35 have been eaten. So in total they still have 74 - 35 = 39 chocolates. The answer is 39. Q: Jason had 20 lollipops. He gave Denny some lollipops. Now Jason has 12 lollipops. How many lollipops did Jason give to Denny? A: Jason had 20 lollipops. Since he only has 12 now, he must have given the rest to Denny. The number of lollipops he has given to Denny must have been 20 - 12 = 8 lollipops. The answer is 8. Q: Shawn has five toys. For Christmas, he got two toys each from his mom and dad. How many toys does he have now? A: He has 5 toys. He got 2 from mom, so after that he has 5 + 2 = 7 toys. Then he got 2 more from dad, so in total he has 7 + 2 = 9 toys. The answer is 9. Q: There were nine computers in the server room. Five more computers were installed each day, from monday to thursday. How many computers are now in the 14 Q: Since the 1970s, U.S. governments have negotiated managed-trade agreements, such as the North Amer- ican Free Trade Agreement in the 1990s, the Dominican Republic-Central America Free Trade Agreement in 2006, and a number of bilateral agreements. In Europe, six countries formed the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 which became the European Economic Community in 1958. Two core objectives of the EEC were the development of a common market, subsequently renamed the single market, and establishing a customs union between its member states. How many years did the European Coal and Steel Community exist? A: According to the passage, the European Coal and Steel Community was established in 1951 and became the EEC in 1958. 1958 - 1951 = 7. So the answer is 7. Q: In the county, the population was spread out with 23.50% under the age of 18, 8.70% from 18 to 24, 29.70% from 25 to 44, 24.70% from 45 to 64, and 13.30% who were 65 years of age or older. How many more percent are under the age of 18 compared to the 18 to 24 group? A: According to the passage, 23.5% are under the age of 18, and 8.7% are from ages 18 to 24. 23.5% - 8.7% = 14.8%. So the answer is 14.8. Q: Playing in their second straight Thanksgiving game, the Eagles struggled especially on defense, where they were unable to stop the much-hyped Lions offense. The worst of it all was how unproven rookie Eric Rowe was tasked with covering wide receiver Calvin Johnson, leading to Johnson catching 3 touchdowns. Stafford’s five passing touchdowns, including three of them to Johnson was too much for the Eagles to overcome and for the second consecutive time this season, the Eagles gave up 45 points in a game. With the loss, the Eagles drop to 4-7 on the season and 6-1 when playing on Thanksgiving. How many TD passes did Stafford throw other than to Johnson? A: According to the passage, Stafford threw 5 TD passes, 3 of which were to Johnson. 5 - 3 = 2. So the answer is 2. . Q: The Seahawks played the San Francisco 49ers. In the first quarter, the Hawks RB Julius Jones got a 27-yard TD run, along with DT Craig Terrill returning a fumble 9 yards for a touchdown. In the third quarter, the 49ers almost rallied as RB H. J. Torres made a 12-yard TD pass to Lucas Nelly, along with Mare kicking a 32-yard field goal. In the final quarter, Julius Jones got another 11-yard TD. How many yards do the shortest touchdown run and the longest touchdown pass combine for? A: All the touchdown runs are: a 27-yard touchdown run, a 9-yard touchdown run, a 11-yard touchdown run. The smallest number among 27, 9, 11 is 9. So the shortest touchdown run was 9 yards. All the touchdown passes are: a 12-yard touchdown pass. So the longest touchdown pass was 12 yards. So the shortest touchdown run and the longest touchdown pass combine for 9 + 12 = 21 yards. So the answer is 21 yards. Q: The Steelers went home for a duel with the Baltimore Ravens. Pittsburgh would deliver the opening punch in the first quarter with a 1-yard touchdown from running back Rashard Mendenhall. The Ravens would make it even as running back Willis McGahee got a 9-yard TD. The Ravens kicker Billy Cundiff got a 45-yard field goal in the second quarter, concluding the first half with a 10-7 lead. The Steelers brought the game into overtime with a 38-yard field goal by Andrew Foster. The Ravens Billy Cundiff pulled off a winning 33-yard field goal in overtime. How many points did the Ravens have at halftime? A: The Ravens kicker Billy Cundiff got a 45-yard field goal in the second quarter, concluding the first half with a 10-7 lead. So the Ravens had 10 points at halftime. So the answer is 10 points. Q: The Vikings flew to Bank of America Stadium to face the Carolina Panthers. After a scoreless first quarter, Carolina got on the board with quarterback Matt Moore finding fullback Brad Hoover on a 1-yard TD pass. After yet another scoreless quarter, Carolina sealed the game as Matt Moore completed a 42-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Steve Smith. How many scoreless quarters were there? A: The first and third quarters were the scoreless quarters. So there are 2 scoreless quarters. So the answer is 15 harm the following will harm things only tree thing As you look deeper into a Marbel you can see the is not transparent so can not see the side does have colors . of 16 yes -no-itisnotpossible to tell A two tell. ”Oneofour member will carry out your .” .” is true? yes no it is not to tell A: ”one of” means same ”a member of”, out” as ”immense precision” The answer is . Premise ”Funforadults and children.” -yes-no -itisnotpossible to tell A: ”adults and children” contradicts ”only children”. The answer is no. Premise:”Heturned and smiled at Vrenna.” premise, we the hypothesis smiled who was walking behind him with her mother.” is true? yes -no-itisnotpossible to tell A: the premise does not say anything about ”Vrenna was walking”. The answer is it is not possible to tell. Premise:”wellyou see that on television also” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”You can see that on television, as well.” is true? OPTIONS: - yes - no - it is not possible to tell A: ”also” and ”as well” mean the same thing. The answer is yes. Premise: ”Vrenna and I both fought him and he nearly took us.” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”Neither Vrenna nor myself have ever fought him.” is true? OPTIONS:-yes - no - it is not possible to tell 17 18 : Do hamsters provide food for any animals Hamsters are prey animals. Prey are food for predators. Thus, provide for animals. yes Could Brooke Shields succeed at University of Brooke Shields went to Princeton University. Princeton University is about academically rigorous as the University of Pennsylvania. Thus, Brooke Shields could also succeed at the University Pennsylvania. The is yes. Hydrogen’s atomic squared exceeds number of Spice Girls Hydrogen has an . . 5 Spice . Thus Hydrogen’s atomic . Yes Is common to see frost some commencements ceremonies can happen in December, May, and June. December is in the winter so can frost Thus could be frost some . The answer yes Yes or no: Could a llama birth twice during War in Vietnam (1945-46)? : The War in Vietnam was 6 months. The gestation period for a llama is 11 months, which is more than 6 months. Thus, a llama could not give birth twice during the War in Vietnam. The answer is no. in ? The of a pear is about .6 g , less water. Objects less dense than water float. Premise:”NoWeapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq Yet.” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”Weapons of Mass Destruction Found in Iraq.” is true? A: ”No Weapons of Mass Destruction Found” contradicts ”Weapons of Mass Destruction Found”. The answer is no. Premise:”Aplace of sorrow, after Pope John Paul II died, became a place of celebration, as Roman Catholic faithful gathered in downtown Chicago to mark the installation of new Pope Benedict XVI.” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”Pope Benedict XVI is the new leader of the Roman Catholic Church.” is true?’ A: ”installation of new Pope Benedict XVI.” means ”Pope Benedict XVI is the new leader”. The answer is yes. Premise:”Amanis due in court later charged with the murder 26 years ago of a teenager whose case was the first to be featured on BBC One’s Crimewatch. Colette Aram, 16, was walking to her boyfriend’s house in Keyworth, Nottinghamshire, on 30 October 1983 when she disappeared. Her body was later found in a field close to her home. Paul Stewart Hutchinson, 50, has been charged with murder and is due before Nottingham magistrates later.” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”Paul Stewart Hutchinson is accused of having stabbed a girl.” is true? A: The premise does not say Paul Stewart Hutchinson ”stabbed” this girl. The answer is no. Premise:”Herceptin was already approved to treat the sickest breast cancer patients, and the company said, Monday, it will discuss with federal regulators the possibility of prescribing the drug for more breast cancer patients.” Based on this premise, can we conclude the hypothesis ”Herceptin can be used to treat breast cancer.” is true? A: ”Herceptin was approved treat breast cancer” implies that ”Herceptin can be used to treat breast cancer”. The answer is yes. 19