

U NIVERSAL S ENTENCE R EPRESENTATIONS L EARN - ING WITH C ONDITIONAL M ASKED L ANGUAGE M ODEL

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT



This paper presents a novel training method, Conditional Masked Language Mod- eling (CMLM), to effectively learn sentence representations on large scale un- labeled corpora. CMLM integrates sentence representation learning into MLM training by conditioning on the encoded vectors of adjacent sentences. Our En- glish CMLM model achieves state-of-the-art performance on SentEval (Conneau & Kiela, 2018), even outperforming models learned using (semi-)supervised sig- nals. As a fully unsupervised learning method, CMLM can be conveniently ex- tended to a broad range of languages and domains. We ﬁnd that a multilingual CMLM model co-trained with bitext retrieval (BR) and natural language infer- ence (NLI) tasks outperforms the previous state-of-the-art multilingual models by a large margin. We explore the same language bias of the learned representations, and propose a principle component based approach to remove the language identi- fying information from the representation while still retaining sentence semantics.



1 I NTRODUCTION

 Sentence embeddings map sentences into a vector space. The vectors capture rich semantic infor- mation that can be used to measure semantic textual similarity (STS) between sentences or train classiﬁers for a broad range of downstream tasks (Conneau et al., 2017; Subramanian et al., 2018; Logeswaran & Lee, 2018; Cer et al., 2018; Reimers & Gurevych, 2019; Yang et al., 2019a;d). State- of-the-art models are usually trained on supervised tasks such as natural language inference (Con- neau et al., 2017), or with semi-structured data like question-answer pairs (Cer et al., 2018) and trans- lation pairs (Subramanian et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019a). However, labeled and semi-structured data are difﬁcult and expensive to obtain, making it hard to cover many domains and languages. Conversely, recent efforts to improve language models include the development of masked language model (MLM) pre-training from large scale unlabeled corpora (Devlin et al., 2019; Lan et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2019). While internal MLM model representations are helpful when ﬁne-tuning on down- stream tasks, they do not directly produce good sentence representations, without further supervised (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) or semi-structured (Feng et al., 2020) ﬁne-tuning. In this paper, we explore an unsupervised approach, called Conditional Masked Language Mod- eling (CMLM), to effectively learn sentence representations from large scale unlabeled corpora. CMLM integrates sentence representation learning into MLM training by conditioning on sentence level representations produced by adjacent sentences. Since CMLM is fully unsupervised, it can be easily extended to new languages. We explore CMLM for both English and multilingual sentence embeddings for 100+ languages. Our English CMLM model achieves state-of-the-art performance on SentEval (Conneau & Kiela, 2018), even outperforming models learned using (semi-)supervised signals. Moreover, models training on the English Amazon review data using our multilingual vec- tors exhibit strong multilingual transfer performance on translations of the Amazon review evalua- tion data to French, German and Japanese, outperforming existing multilingual sentence embedding models by > 5% for non-English languages and by > 2% on the original English data. We further extend the multilingual CMLM to co-training with parallel text (bitext) retrieval task, and ﬁnetuning with cross-lingual natural language inference (NLI) data, inspired by the success of prior work on multitask sentence representation learning (Subramanian et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019a) and NLI learning (Conneau et al., 2017; Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). We achieve performance 1 . 4% better than the previous state-of-the-art multilingual sentence representation model (see details 1 “Life is a box of chocolate.” TransformerEncoder pooling Sentence vector 𝑣 𝑣 ! 𝑣 " 𝑣 # . . . . TransformerEncoder “You never [MASK] what you’re [MASK] get .” projection 𝑃(𝑣) 𝑣 ! 𝑣 " 𝑣 # . . . know, gonna in section 4.2). Language agnostic representations require semantically similar cross-lingual pairs to be closer in representation space than unrelated same-language pairs (Roy et al., 2020). While we ﬁnd our original sentence embeddings do have a bias for same language sentences, we discover that removing the ﬁrst few principal components of the embeddings eliminates the self language bias. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: (1) A novel pre-training technique CMLM for unsupervised sentence representation learning on unlabeled corpora (either in mono- lingual and multilingual). (2) Multitask training with CMLM followed by a cross-lingual NLI ﬁne-tuning for multilingual representation (3) An evaluation benchmark for multilingual sentence representations. (4) A principle components based method to remove same language bias.

2 C ONDITIONAL M ASKED L ANGUAGE M ODELING

 We introduce Conditional Masked Language Modeling (CMLM) as a novel architecture for com- bining next sentence prediction with MLM training. By “conditional”, we mean the MLM task for one sentence depends on the encoded sentence level representation of the adjacent sentence. This builds on prior work on next sentence prediction that has been widely used for learning sentence level representations (Kiros et al., 2015; Logeswaran & Lee, 2018; Cer et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2019a), but has thus far produced poor quality sentence embeddings within BERT based models (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). While existing MLMs like BERT include next sentence prediction tasks, they do so without any inductive bias to try to encode the meaning of a sentence within a single embedding vector. We introduce a strong inductive bias for learning sentence embeddings by structuring the task as follows. Given a pair of ordered sentences, the ﬁrst sentence is feed to an encoder that produces a sentence level embedding. The embedding is then provided to an encoder that conditions on the sentence embedding in order to better perform MLM prediction over the second sentence. This is notably similar to Skip-Thought (Kiros et al., 2015), but replaces the generation of the complete second sentence with the MLM denoising objective. It is also similar to T5’s MLM inspired unsupervised encode-decoder objective (Raffel et al., 2019), with the second encoder acting as a sort of decoder given the representation produced for the ﬁrst sentence. Our method critically differs from T5’s in that a sentence embedding bottleneck is used to pass information between two model components and in that the task involves denoising a second sentence when conditioning on the ﬁrst rather than denoising a single text stream. Fig. 1 illustrates the architecture of our model. The ﬁrst sentence s 1 is tokenized and input to a transformer encoder and a sentence vector v ∈ R d is computed from the sequence outputs by average pooling. 1 The sentence vector v is then projected into N spaces with one of the projections being the identity mapping, i.e. v p = P ( v ) ∈ R d × N . Here we use a three-layer neural network 1 One can equivalently choose other pooling methods, such as max pooling or use the vector output corre- sponding to a special token position such as the [CLS] token. 2 as the projection P ( · ) . The second sentence s 2 is then masked following the procedure described in the original BERT paper, including random replacement and the use of unchanged tokens. The second encoder shares the same weights with the encoder used to embed s 1 . Tokens in the masked s 2 are converted into word vectors and concatenated with v d . The concatenated representations are provided to the transformer encoder to predict the masked tokens in s 2 . At inference time, we keep the ﬁrst encoding module and discard the subsequent MLM prediction. In Section 5.2, we explore various different conﬁgurations of CMLM, including the number of projection spaces, and how the projected vectors are connected to the embeddings of the second sentence.

3 L EARNING E NGLISH S ENTENCE R EPRESENTATIONS WITH CMLM

 For training English sentence encoders with CMLM, we use three Common Crawl dumps. The data are ﬁltered by a classiﬁer which detects whether a sentence belongs to the main content of the web page or not. We use WordPiece tokenization and the vocabulary is the same as public English uncased BERT. In order to make the CMLM task more challenging and enable the model to learn bidirectional information, for two consecutive sequences s 1 and s 2 , we swap their order for 50% of the time. The length of s 1 and s 2 are set to be 256 tokens. The number of masked tokens in s 2 are 80 (31.3%), moderately higher than classical BERT. This change in the ratio of masked tokens is to make the task more challenging, due to the fact that in CMLM, language modeling has access to extra information from adjacent sentences. We train with batch size of 2048 for 1 million steps. The optimizer is LAMB with learning rate of 10 − 3 , β 1 = 0 . 9 , β 2 = 0 . 999 , warm-up in the ﬁrst 10,000 steps and linear decay afterwards. We explore two transformer conﬁgurations, base and large, same as in the original BERT paper. The number of projections N = 15 .

3.1 E VALUATION

 We evaluate the sentence representations on the following tasks: (1) classiﬁcation: MR (movie reviews Pang & Lee (2005)), binary SST (sentiment analysis, Socher et al. (2013)), TREC (question-type, Voorhees & Tice (2000)), CR (product reviews, Hu & Liu (2004)), SUBJ (sub- jectivity/objectivity, Pang & Lee (2004)). (2) Entailment: SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and SICK dataset for entailment (SICK-E, Marelli et al. (2014)). The evaluation is done using SentEval (Con- neau & Kiela, 2018) which is a prevailing evaluation toolkit for sentence embeddings. The classiﬁer for the downstream is logistic regression. For each task, the encoder and embeddings are ﬁxed and only downstream neural structures are trained. The baseline sentence embedding models include SkipThought (Kiros et al., 2015), InferSent (Con- neau et al., 2017), USE (Cer et al., 2018), English BERT using standard pre-trained models from TensorFlow Hub website (Devlin et al. (2019), and SentBert (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019). To ad- dress the effects of different training processes and data, we generate training data for MLM from the same Common Crawl Corpora and train standard BERT models (English BERT base/large (CC)). The representations for BERT are computed by averaging pooling of the sequence outputs (we also exploring options including [CLS] vector and max pooling).

3.2 R ESULTS

 Evaluation results are presented in Table 1. CMLM outperforms existing models overall, besting MLM (both English BERT and English BERT (CC)) using both base and large conﬁgurations. The closest competing model is SentBERT, which uses supervised NLI data rather than a purely unsu- pervised approach. Interestingly, CMLM outperforms SentBERT on the SICK-E NLI task.

4 L EARNING M ULTILINGUAL S ENTENCE R EPRESENTATIONS WITH CMLM

 As a fully unsupervised method, CMLM can be conveniently extended to multilingual modeling even for less well resourced languages. Learning good multilingual sentence representations is more challenging than learning monolingual ones, especially when attempting to capture the se- mantic alignment between different languages. As CMLM does not explicitly address cross-lingual alignment, we explore several modeling approaches besides CMLM: (1) Co-training CMLM with a bitext retrieval task; (2) Fine-tuning with cross-lingual NLI data. 3

4.1 M ULTILINGUAL CMLM

 We follow the same conﬁguration used to learn English sentence representations with CMLM, but extend the training data to include more languages. Results below will show that CMLM again exhibits competitive performance as a general technique to learn from large scale unlabeled corpora.

4.2 M ULTITASK T RAINING WITH CMLM AND B ITEXT R ETRIEVAL

 Besides the monolingual pretraining data, we collect a dataset of bilingual translation pairs { ( s i , t i ) } using a bitext mining system (Feng et al., 2020). The source sentences { s i } are in English and the target sentences { t i } covers over 100 languages. We build a retrieval task with the translation parallel data, identifying the corresponding translation of the input sentence from candidates in the same batch. Concretely, incorporating Additive Margin Softmax (Yang et al., 2019b), we compute the bitext retrieval loss L sbr for the source sentences as: Above φ ( l ( i ) s , l ( i ) t ) denotes the the inner products of sentence vectors of l ( i ) s and l ( i ) t (embedded by the transformer encoder); m and B denotes the additive margin and the batch size respectively. Note the way to generate sentence embeddings is the same as in CMLM. We can compute the bitext retrieval loss for the target sentences L tbr by normalizing over source sentences, rather than target sentences, in the denominator. 2 The ﬁnal bitext retrieval loss L br is given as L br = L s br + L t br . There are several ways to incorporate the monolingual CMLM task and bitext retrieval (BR). We explore the following multistage and multitask pretraining strategies: S1. CMLM → BR: Train with CMLM in the ﬁrst stage and then train with on BR; S2. CMLM+BR: Train with both CMLM and BR from the start; S3. CMLM → CMLM+BR: Train with only CMLM in the ﬁrst stage and then with both tasks. When training with both CMLM and BR, the optimization loss is a weighted sum of the language modeling and the retrieval loss L br , i.e. L = L CMLM + α L br . We empirically ﬁnd α = 0 . 2 works well. As shown in Table 3, S3 is found to be the most effective. Unless otherwise denoted, our models trained with CMLM and BR follow S3. We also discover that given a pre-trained transformer encoder, e.g. mBERT, we can improve the quality of sentence representations by ﬁnetuning the transformer encoder with CMLM and BR. As shown in Table 2 and Table 3, the improvements between “mBERT” and “f-mBERT” (ﬁnetuned mBERT) are signiﬁcant. 2 i.e., by swapping the i and j subscripts in the last term of the denominator. 4

4.3 F INETUNING WITH C ROSS LINGUAL N ATURAL L ANGUAGE I NFERENCE

 Finetuning with NLI data has proved to be an effective method to improve the quality of embeddings for English models. We extend this to the multilingual domain. Given a premise sentence u and a hypothesis sentence v , we train a 3-way classiﬁer on the concatenation of [ u , v , | u − v | , u ∗ v ] . Weights of transformer encoders are also updated in the ﬁnetuning process. Different from previous work also using multilingual NLI data (Yang et al., 2019a), the premise u and hypothesis v here are in different languages. The cross lingual NLI data are generated by translating Multi-Genre NLI Corpus (Williams et al., 2018) into 14 languages using an industrial translation API.

4.4 C ONFIGURATIONS

 Monolingual training data for CMLM are generated from 3 versions of Common Crawl data in 113 languages. The data cleaning and ﬁltering is the same as the English-only ones. A new cased vocabulary is built from the all data sources using the WordPiece vocabulary generation library from Tensorﬂow Text. The language smoothing exponent from the vocab generation tool is set to 0.3, as the distribution of data size for each language is imbalanced. The ﬁnal vocabulary size is 501,153. The number of projections N = 10 and the batch size B = 2048 . For CMLM only pretraining, the number of steps is 2 million. In multitask learning, for S1 and S3, the ﬁrst stage is of 1.5 million and the second stage is of 1 million steps; for S2, number of training steps is 2 million. The transformer encoder uses the BERT base conﬁguration. Initial learning rate and optimizer chosen are the same as the English models.

4.5 E VALUATIONS 4.5.1 XEVAL: M ULTILINGUAL B ENCHMARKS FOR S ENTENCE R EPRESENTATIONS E VALUATION

 Evaluations in previous multilingual literature focused on the cross lingual transfer learning abil- ity from English to other languages. However, this evaluation protocol that treats English as the “anchor” does not equally assess the quality of non-English sentence representations with English ones. In order to address the issue, we prepare a new benchmark for multilingual sentence vectors, XEVAL, by translating SentEval (English) to other 14 languages with an industrial translation API. Results of models trained with monolingual data are shown in Table 2. Baseline models include mBERT (Devlin et al., 2019), XLM-R (Ruder et al., 2019) and a transformer encoder trained with 5 MLM on the same Common Crawl data (MLM(CC), again this is to control the effects of training data). The method to produce sentence representations for mBERT and XLM-R is chosen to be averaging pooling after exploring options including [CLS] representations and max pooling. The multilingual model CMLM on monolingual data outperform all baselines in 12 out of 15 languages and the average performance. Results of models trained with cross lingual data are presented in Table 3. Baseline models for comparison include LASER (Artetxe & Schwenk (2019), trained with parallel data) and multilingual USE ((Yang et al., 2019a), trained with cross lingual NLI). Our model (S3) outperforms LASER in 13 out of 15 languages. Notably, ﬁnetuning with NLI in the cross lingual way produces signiﬁcant improvement (S3 + NLI v.s. S3) and it also outperforms mUSE by signiﬁcant margins 3 . Multitask learning with CMLM and BR can also be used to increase the performance of pretrained encoders, e.g. mBERT. mBERT trained with CMLM and BR (f-mBERT) has a signiﬁcant upon mBERT.

4.5.2 A MAZON R EVIEWS

 We also conduct a zero-shot transfer learning evaluation on Amazon reviews dataset (Prettenhofer & Stein, 2010). Following Chidambaram et al. (2019), the original dataset is converted to a clas- siﬁcation benchmark by treating reviews with strictly more than 3 stars as positive and negative otherwise. We split 6000 English reviews in the original training set into 90% for training and 10% for development. The two-way classiﬁer, upon the concatenation of [ u , v , | u − v | , u ∗ v ] , is trained on the English training set and then evaluated on English, French, German and Japanese test sets (each has 6000 examples). Note the same multilingual encoder and classiﬁer are used for all the evaluations. We also experiment with whether freezing the encoder weights or not during training. As presented in Table 4 CMLM alone has already outperformed baseline models. Training with BR and cross lingual NLI ﬁnetuning further boost the performance parameters frozen during ﬁnetuning Encoder parameters trained during ﬁnetuning

5 A NALYSIS 5.1 L ANGUAGE A GNOSTIC P ROPERTIES

 Language Agnosticism has been a property of great interest for multilingual representations. How- ever, there has not been a qualitative measurement or rigid deﬁnition for this property. Here we propose that “language agnostic” refers to the property that sentences representations are neutral w.r.t their language information. For example, two sentences with similar semantics should be close in embedding space whether they are of the same languages or not. Another case is that given one 3 Note mUSE only supports 16 languages, the best CMLM model is still signiﬁcantly better if only consid- ering the mUSE supported languages (underline in table 2 indicates the unsupported languages by mUSE) 6 query sentence in language l 1 and two candidate sentences with the identical meanings (different from the query sentence) in languages l 1 and l 2 , the l 1 input sentence should not be biased towards the l 1 candidate sentence. To capture this intuition, we convert the PAWS-X dataset (Yang et al., 2019c) to a retrieval task to measure the language agnostic property. Speciﬁcally, PAWS-X dataset consists of English sentences and their translations in other six languages ( x -axis labels in Fig. 2). Given a query, we inspect the language distribution of the retrieved sentences (by ranking cosine similarities). In Fig. 2, query sentences are in German, French and Chinese for each row. Represen- tations of mBERT (ﬁrst row) have a strong self language bias, i.e. sentences in the language match- ing the query are dominant. In contrast, the bias is much weaker in our model trained with CMLM and BR (the third column), probably due to the cross lingual retrieval pretraining. We discover that removing the ﬁrst principal component of each monolingual space from sentence representations effectively eliminate the self language bias. As shown in the second and the fourth column in Fig. 2, with principal component removal (PCR), the language distribution is much more uniform. We fur- ther explore PCR by experimenting on the Tatoeba dataset. Table 5 shows the retrieval accuracy of multilingual model with and w/o PCR. PCR increases the overall retrieval performance for both two models. This suggests the ﬁrst principal components in each monolingual space primarily encodes language identiﬁcation information . We also visualize the sentence representations in Tatoeba dataset in Fig. 3. Our model (the ﬁrst row) shows both weak and strong semantic alignment (Roy et al., 2020). Representations are close to others with similar semantics regardless of their languages (strong alignment), especially for French and Russian, where representations form several distinct clusters. Also representations from the same language tend to cluster (weak alignment). While representations from mBERT generally exhibits weak alignment. 7

5.2 A BLATION S TUDY

 In this section, we explore different conﬁgurations of CMLM, including the number of spaces in the projection N and CMLM architecture. As shown in Table 6, projecting the sentence vector into N = 15 produces highest overall performance. We also try a modiﬁcation to CMLM architecture. Besides the concatenation with token embeddings of s 2 before input to the transformer encoder, the projected vectors are also concatenated with the sequence outputs of s 2 for the masked token prediction. This version of architecture is denoted as “skip” and model performance actually becomes worse. Note that the projected vector can also be used to produce the sentence representation v s . For example, one way is to use the average of projected vectors, i.e. v s = 1 N (cid:80) i v ( i ) p . Recall v ( i ) p is the i th projection. This version is denoted as “proj” in Table 6. Sentence representations produced in this way still yield competitive performance, which further conﬁrm the effectiveness of the projection. Model MR CR n = 82 3 89 7 95.8 88.8 87.6 90.4 71.5 80.8 85.8 n = 5 83.7 90.0 95.5 89.0 89.4 86.6 69.5 79.3 85.4 n = 10 83.4 89.0 96.1 88.9 88.2 90.2 68.5 79.7 85.4 n = 15 83.6 89.9 96.2 89

6 C ONCLUSION

 We present a novel sentence representation learning method Conditional Masked Language Model- ing (CMLM) for training on large scale unlabeled corpus. CMLM outperforms the previous state-of- the-art English sentence embeddings models, including those trained with (semi-)supervised signals. For multilingual representations learning, we discover that co-training CMLM with bitext retrieval and cross-lingual NLI ﬁnetuning achieves state-of-the-art performance. We also discover that mul- tilingual representations have the same language bias and principal component removal (PCR) can eliminate the bias by separating language identity information from semantics. 8 9 Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence Organization, 7 2019b. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/746. URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2019/746 . 10 11