

T HRUST : A DAPTIVELY P ROPELS L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS WITH E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Large-scale pre-trained language models (PTLM) have achieved great success in various natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Much evidence shows that PTLMs already encode rich knowledge themselves, but knowledge stored in PTLMs can be opaque and static, making external knowledge retrieval neces- sary. However, there are two major challenges when using external knowledge. First, knowledge indexing and retrieving on large-scale knowledge bases are time costly. Second, knowledge retrieved could be noisy and sometimes misleading. Motivated by the observation that external knowledge is not always required by PTLMs, we investigate an effective and efﬁcient way to apply knowledge only when the knowledge is essential. Speciﬁcally, we propose instance-level adap- tive propulsion of external knowledge (IAPEK), where we score each instance on whether the PTLMs need the support of external knowledge. To achieve this goal, we design a novel metric, Thrust , which leverages the distribution estimation on seen/training instances. Extensive experiments demonstrate that we can achieve signiﬁcantly higher cost-efﬁciency through Thrust compared to the naive usage of external knowledge on 88% of the evaluated tasks with 26% average perfor- mance improvement. Such ﬁndings further shed light on the real-world practice of knowledge-enhanced LMs with a limited budget for knowledge seeking due to computation latency or costs 1 .

1 I NTRODUCTION

 Knowledge plays an important role in solving natural language processing (NLP) tasks, where en- cyclopedic or commonsense knowledge is commonly required to answer questions from various tasks (Yin et al., 2022). In recent years, the emergent advance of pre-trained language models (PTLM) has demonstrated great improvement on various tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020). Evidence also show that PTLMs con- tain rich encyclopedic (Petroni et al., 2019) or commonsense (Kocijan et al., 2019) knowledge them- selves. However, such implicit knowledge embedded in the model’s hidden states can be opaque, static, and inefﬁcient to utilize (Khattab et al., 2022). These issues motivate the common practice on seeking external knowledge (Xu et al., 2021; Verga et al., 2021; Paranjape et al., 2022) in NLP. A typical line of work focuses on retrieval-based methods, where knowledge is retrieved by a stand- alone retriever from external knowledge bases and then used to augment the inference models (i.e., Reader) such as PTLMs (Karpukhin et al., 2020; Gao & Callan, 2021; Khattab & Zaharia, 2020). However, there are several limitations with the usage of external knowledge: (i) performance on the downstream tasks is not commonly revealed. Metrics of the common benchmarks (e.g., MS- MARCO (Nguyen et al., 2016), BEIR (Thakur et al., 2021)) measure the quality of retrieval (e.g., Recall@50, nDCG@10). Although retrieving the relevant content may positively relate to the down- stream performance, not reporting the downstream performance, especially for the out-of-domain tasks, limits the exploration of how to utilize the external knowledge in practice; (ii) the external knowledge can be noisy or unnecessary. On the retriever side, though concurrent retrievers achieve great performance on various tasks, the noise can still exist. For instance, ColBERT v2 (San- thanam et al., 2022) achieved 68.9 Success@5 on Natural Question (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), which suggests that gold documents do not appear in the top 5 retrieved documents for 31.1% of 1 The code and data will be released after acceptance. 1 the queries. Considering the limited input token length, the most useful documents may not be in- cluded during prediction. Not to mention that others can be noise to the model. On the model side, PTLMs with growing capacity, from millions (e.g., BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)) to billions of param- eters (e.g., OPT (Zhang et al., 2022b)), may solve the queries directly without external knowledge, which makes it unnecessary to seek external knowledge and signiﬁes the noise issue. The example shown in Figure 1 demonstrates the noise and inefﬁciency issues. OPT (the version with 175 billion parameters) can directly give the correct answer without any external knowledge. However, with top external knowledge retrieved by DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020) from Wikipedia paragraphs, the external knowledge can be useless or even lead to wrong predictions. Intuitively, a solution to the noise and inefﬁciency issues is only seeking external knowledge when it is necessary. In this work, we capture this intuition by proposing I nstance-level A daptive P ropulsion of E xternal K nowledge (IAPEK) to reduce the effect of noise in external knowledge and improve the cost-efﬁciency of knowledge augmentation. In detail, for each instance of a given task, we com- pute a conﬁdence score measuring how likely it can be solved directly with respect to a given model and reject the use of external knowledge when the score is high. We design a simple and lightweight metric Thrust to serve such a purpose by leveraging the estimation of the instance distribution in the eyes of the target models. To comprehensively understand the effectiveness of Thrust , we ﬁrst create a large-scale benchmark examining the downstream performance of the task-plus-knowledge paradigm with (i) tasks with different formats and types (e.g., multiple-choice classiﬁcation (MC classiﬁcation) and open-domain question answering (open-domain QA)); (ii) knowledge with dif- ferent formats and from different resources (e.g., knowledge graphs, Wikipedia paragraphs, and human annotations). Next, with models that can utilize external knowledge, we evaluate the ef- fectiveness of Thrust by showing that it can boost the performance of various tasks under various settings, such as injecting external knowledge to different portions of the test instances. Extensive experiments show that Thrust can improve the cost-efﬁciency of seeking and using exter- nal knowledge on 88% cases with 26% average performance improvement through identifying the instances that mostly require knowledge. We can also observe that, with Thrust , we can achieve higher performance than injecting external knowledge for all the instances, where models are bene- ﬁted from both the performance and efﬁciency aspects.

2 O UR METHOD 2.1 I NSTANCE - LEVEL ADAPTIVE PROPULSION OF KNOWLEDGE

 We ﬁrst deﬁne IAPEK as follows: for each query q i in a given test set D = { q (1) , q (2) , . . . } , let f ( q ) denotes the scoring function of the necessity of external knowledge, we extract the corresponding scores S = { f ( q ) (1) , f ( q ) (2) , . . . } . With S , we re-rank the test set into D ′ = { q ′ (1) , q ′ (2) , . . . } . Given any threshold t ∈ R , we sample a subset D k = { q (1) k , q (2) k , . . . } as that with highest knowledge need, where for each q k ∈ D k , f ( q k ) > t . Empirically, we can set t as a particular percentile of S , e.g., top 25% of S . Next, for each instance in D k , we seek for external knowledge pieces and 2 In the controversial and no knowledge cases, the knowledge contained internally is less likely to answer the query successfully. In contrast, if the model ﬁnds the query similar to various seen instances, the internal knowledge is likely to exist. augment each query q k to q k + . We combine updated D k + and original unsampled instances D \ D k to the new knowledge augmented dataset D + to apply to inference models.

2.2 T HRUST

 We then introduce a novel empirical method, Thrust , to perform the proposed instance-level adaptive propulsion of external knowledge (IAPEK) . We design Thrust to measure how likely the given query can be solved by the internal knowledge of the target model. Intuitively, there are two cases where models can fail to answer a query with internal knowledge: (i) the model has no relevant knowledge and is not familiar with the query semantics or inference types; (ii) the model faces controversial knowledge, where the query may have similar semantics with different kinds of seen questions that potentially require different reasoning to solve. As shown in Figure 2, from a cluster view of the instance distribution, we can use the distance be- tween the query representation and the instance cluster centers to measure if a query can be solved with internal knowledge. Motivated by that, the Thrust score of a given query can be computed as: (i) we ﬁrst estimate the instance distribution in the view of the target model by casting a set of instances (in our experiments, we use the training data as deﬁned in Section 3.2) into the representa- tion space 2 ; (ii) to improve the efﬁciency during the testing, we conduct K-means clustering on the instance vectors and extract a set of clusters C , where |C| is relative to the size of estimated instances; (iii) during test time, for the general cases, for each instance query q , we calculate vectorized thrust ( t v ) as follows: we ﬁrst extract the unit vectors pointing from the query vector to the center of each cluster; then we calculate t v as the length of the sum vector of these directed vectors weighted by the size of the each cluster over the square of the Euclidean distance between the query vector and center vectors. For binary classiﬁcation, motivated by (Murty et al., 2021), we leverage the property of binary labels and design binary thrust ( t b ) as a variant, which is calculated directly as the absolute value of the sum of the weights (cluster size over distance) multiplied by the corresponding numer- ical labels (i.e., +1 or − 1 ). In short, if we denote r as the distance between a query and a cluster c , c 0 as the center of cluster c , and l c as the label of cluster c , t v and t b can then be written as: For t v , there is no need for the labels of the estimating or testing examples. For t b , there is still no need for the labels of the test examples. Such characteristics suggest that the Thrust scores can be computed at any stage during learning and inference. On the other hand, since we use the static hidden states from the given models, there is no involvement of any additional ﬁne-tuning. We simply use the training examples from the split of the original work to estimate the query distribution 2 In our experiments, if not speciﬁed, we use the last layer hidden states of the models to represent each query instance. For T5-based models, we use the last layers of the decoders . 3 for the purpose of avoiding any sort of data leak. The training set is not used for updating the weights during computing Thrust scores.

3 E XPERIMENT

 In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the experiment setups. Next, considering that a preliminary condi- tion of applying Thrust is that the model can get beneﬁt from external knowledge, we ﬁrst investigate the effectiveness of external knowledge on various models with the collected benchmark. Upon that, we evaluate the effectiveness of Thrust from the perspective of cost-efﬁciency as a simulation of the real-world usage, where the knowledge can be costly to acquire knowledge, i.e., with a speciﬁc portion of instances to be augmented with external knowledge, how much the proposed method can improve the performance.

3.1 S ETUP

 We evaluate T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), GPT-J (Wang & Komatsuzaki, 2021), OPT (Zhang et al., 2022b), and UniﬁedQA (Khashabi et al., 2020). We test both the zero-shot learning setting (models take the prompt with or without knowledge directly) and the transfer-learning setting (models are ﬁne-tuned with examples containing external knowledge) to examine the proper way to use external knowledge. For the zero-shot setting, we test on T5, GPT-J, and OPT (30 billion parameter version). For the transfer-learning setting, we test on UniﬁedQA with different scales. After that, we evaluate the effectiveness of Thrust , where we try to simulate the real-world case where we have limited bandwidth or budget to retrieve external knowledge. Speciﬁcally, we are only allowed to conduct the knowledge retrieval for 25%, 50%, and 75% of instances. As intro- duced in Section 2.1, we use Thrust to rank the instances by their need for external knowledge and select the instances from the most necessary ones. We compare the performance difference between Thrust and random sampling. For MC classiﬁcation tasks, we follow previous works to use accuracy as the evaluation metric. For open-domain QA, we report F1 scores of the models under different settings. The F1 score for question answering measures the max uni-gram overlap between the model prediction and all gold answer candidates. Denoting the gold answer set as G and uni-gram tokens of each query and each corresponding gold answer as T q and T g , the F1 score can then be written as F 1 = max g ∈G ( T q ∩ T g ) / ( T q ∪T g ) . We test on two settings: without knowledge and with knowledge . For the former one, we directly pass the prompt-decorated queries to the model to retrieve the choices with the highest probability or the answer to the questions. For the latter one, we add the prompt-decorated queries, knowledge, and Answer: into three lines and pass them all to the models.

3.2 D ATASETS

 We ﬁrst prepare a benchmark containing knowledge-intensive tasks from two main types: MC clas- siﬁcation and open-domain question answering, with seven and ﬁve tasks, respectively. We unify the instances into the same format, where each contains: (i) a query: a piece of text containing a question or the sentences to be classiﬁed; (ii) an answer: either the label words or the answers to the questions in the query; (iii) knowledge: potentially helpful knowledge for the query, which is either inherently relevant due to the task design, annotated by humans, or retrieved from Wikipedia paragraphs with DPR. Details of the selected datasets are as follows: Multiple-choice classiﬁcation. For MC classiﬁcation, each query q includes a sentence or a ques- tion and requires models to extract one correct answer from a set of candidate answers (e.g., yes or no ). The selected tasks are (i) AGNews (Zhang et al., 2015): AGNews is a classic text clas- siﬁcation task in NLP, where models are required to classify if a piece of news belongs to which among political, sports, business, or technology categories. We regard the titles of the news as the queries since they may already contain sufﬁcient information for classiﬁcation (e.g., Olympic his- tory for India belongs to Sports ); Then, the content of the news is considered as the gold external knowledge extracted from the task design; (ii) e-SNLI (Camburu et al., 2018): e-SNLI is a natural language inference (NLI) task exploiting the role of explanations for the task of textual entailment. We concatenate the original two sentences with a blank and add a question about if entailment exists 4 to form the query. Naturally, the human-providing explanations are considered a strong source of external knowledge; (iii) StrategyQA (Geva et al., 2021): StrategyQA is a challenging multi-hop reasoning dataset that requires models to answer creative questions (e.g., Did Aristotle use a lap- top? ) through strategical inference from implicit reasoning steps. We regard the original creative questions as queries and human-written explicit facts (e.g., Aristotle was born in ... ) as external knowledge, which is again powerful and expected to contain little noise; (iv) CIKQA (Zhang et al., 2022a): CIKQA is a commonsense inference task in the format of multiple-choice question an- swering, combining the tasks of pronoun coreference resolution, commonsense QA (Talmor et al., 2019), COPA (Roemmele et al., 2011), and questions mined from ATOMIC knowledge graph (Sap et al., 2018). We regard the original questions as queries and the supporting commonsense knowl- edge extracted from knowledge graphs (KGs) in the original work as the external knowledge; (v) BoolQ (Clark et al., 2019): BoolQ is a question that contains encyclopedic questions that require models to answer yes or no . Following (Khashabi et al., 2020), we use the Wikipedia paragraphs retrieved by DPR as the external knowledge, which can be potentially noisy; (vi) ARC-E & ARC- C (Clark et al., 2018): ARC is a challenging multiple-choice question answering dataset that re- quires powerful knowledge understanding and reasoning, which is partitioned to an Easy set and a Challenge set (denoted as ARC-E & ARC-C, respectively), where the Challenge set questions are answered incorrectly by the retrieval-based or co-occurrence-based algorithms tested by the original authors. Similarly, we use the Wikipedia paragraphs retrieved by DPR as external knowledge. Open-domain QA. For open-domain QA, each query q contains an open question that typically requires solving an encyclopedic or commonsense inference. The generated answers can either be a few phrases or a single sentence. The involved datasets are HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), Natural Questions (NQ) (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019), Web Questions (Berant et al., 2013), Curated TREC (Baudiš, 2015), and TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017). We use Wikipedia paragraphs retrieved by DPR as the external knowledge as a common practice (Yin et al., 2022), except for HotpotQA, where we use the passages the queries are generated from as a gold knowledge resource. The statistics of the involved datasets are reported in Table 1. We collect a benchmark with var- ious datasets of different types, formats, and knowledge sources, where we will then evaluate the effectiveness of IAPEK on it.

3.3 U SING E XTERNAL K NOWLEDGE

 Table 2 presents the model performance on both the MC classiﬁcation and open-domain QA tasks. For the MC classiﬁcation tasks, we can observe that: (i) for the zero-shot setting, models do not con- sistently get beneﬁt from external knowledge. In addition, the ability to utilize external knowledge is also not clearly improved as the parameter size grows, which indicates that simply using larger models may not be the solution for better using the knowledge; (ii) for the transfer-learning setting, although AGNews , e-SNLI , CIKQA , and StrategyQA are not seen during the training of UniﬁedQA 5 -tuned on the UniﬁedQA dataset. models, we can observe that models achieve better performance than vanilla T5 models at differ- ent sizes. Under the with knowledge case, the UniﬁedQA models achieve signiﬁcant improvement for utilizing external knowledge compared to the zero-shot models, UniﬁedQA-3b achieves the best performance on all the tasks, which indicates that models can learn and transfer the ability to utilize external knowledge with examples containing external knowledge. For open-domain QA datasets, we can observe that: (i) similarly, models fail to get beneﬁt from external knowledge in 11 out of 25 cases under the zero-shot setting. Surprisingly, the smallest model T5-base gets beneﬁts for all the tasks, but the largest model (OPT-30b) gets worse perfor- mance with knowledge for all tasks. The reason behind this can be that, since T5-base does not have enough internal knowledge, any relevant external knowledge can help. As a comparison, the OPT-30b model already contains rich knowledge, and thus the external knowledge may only be in- troducing extra noise if the model does not learn to utilize knowledge; (ii) under the transfer-learning setting, UniﬁedQA-based models get signiﬁcant beneﬁt from the external knowledge, again showing the effectiveness of helping models to learn to use knowledge. In conclusion, we ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning on instances containing external knowledge is an effective way to help models gain performance increase from external knowledge at test time.

3.4 P ERFORMANCE OF T HRUST

 Since a pre-condition of Thrust is that the external knowledge is useful, we evaluate the effective- ness of Thrust with the UniﬁedQA models. From the results in Table 3, we can observe that: (i) Thrust consistently contributes to the performance from the base to the 3B model. Through cluster- ing the instances, we acquire the whole instance distribution in the eyes of the models. Then with distance to the cluster, Thrust represents how well the model can categorize a new query vector and ﬁnd its similarity with others on the task. Leveraging such information, Thrust identiﬁes the no knowledge and controversial knowledge cases well and puts the knowledge into the most necessary ones; (ii) the gain is higher when the portion of augmented instances is smaller. For example, for UniﬁedQA-3b, the gains from Thrust with 25% instances augmented with knowledge are 6.1%, 13.56% on MC classiﬁcation and QA tasks, respectively, while for the 75% case, the gains are 2.8% 6 We ﬁnd that for many cases Thrust can outperform full knowledge usage with fewer examples augmented with external knowledge. and 6.8%. Such observation shows that Thrust is most effective on identifying the most necessary cases. One potential reason is that Thrust is sensitive to the distance change so the isolated examples ( no knowledge case in Figure 2 ) can be easily identiﬁed; (iii) we also observe consistent failure case on ARC-C. The reason can be that the queries are designed as open questions, and the answers are usually about plans or ideas, not facts, so that it is hard for the small-size models to extract useful information from the seemingly unrelated Wikipedia document. For example, a query from ARC-C is: Juan and LaKeisha roll a few objects down a ramp. They want to see which object rolls the farthest. What should they do so they can repeat their investigation? . The correct and wrong options are Record the details of the investigation and Choose different objects to roll . For questions of this style, it is even hard for humans to ﬁnd a relevant Wikipedia page that can help. The failure case further sheds light on the pre-condition of Thrust : we assume that external knowledge is useful.

4 A NALYSIS 4.1 C OMPARISON WITH F ULL K NOWLEDGE U SAGE

 We denote simply using external knowledge for all instances as a costly but straightforward way of leveraging external knowledge. Since the big models might be sufﬁcient for certain instances and the external knowledge might introduce extra noise, we hypothesize that, in some cases, Thrust can help identify instances requiring (or not) knowledge and achieve higher overall performance on the whole dataset compared to seeking and adding knowledge indiscriminately. Table 4 presents the compar- ison between adaptive and indiscriminate knowledge propulsion. Thrust here denotes the best per- formance achieved when less than 90% of instances use external knowledge. We could observe that, for 50% and 30% tasks for UniﬁedQA-base and UniﬁedQA-3b, respectively, Thrust achieves better performance than using knowledge for all instances. Such results indicate that Thrust can help avoid potential noise. On the other hand, we can also observe that for the e-SNLI , Web Questions , and NQ , 7 the full knowledge setting performs better than Thrust . The reason behind this can be that external knowledge is essential and of high quality (e.g., the used knowledge is manually written rather than retrieved). As long as the model can comprehend the external knowledge, seeking and adding more high-quality knowledge always beneﬁt the models.

4.2 D ISTRIBUTION OF T HRUST ACROSS T ASKS

 To further understand how Thrust leads to adaptive knowledge propulsion, we select the top 3 tasks with the highest improvement after applying IAPEK with Thrust from MC classiﬁcation and open-domain QA tasks, respectively. The selected tasks are: e-SNLI , BoolQ , CIKQA , HotpotQA , TriviaQA , and NQ . Figure 3 demonstrates the distribution of Thrust scores for each of the involved tasks. The scores are cast to [0 , 1] with respect to the extremum, and the distribution is normalized by Kernel Density Estimation. From the ﬁgure, we can observe that low scores (i.e., the query needs external knowledge) appear commonly for the open-domain QA tasks such as HotpotQA and TriviaQA . CIKQA queries, which are designed to require commonsense knowledge to solve, also need external knowledge for many cases, as predicted by Thrust . On the other hand, for e-SNLI and BoolQ , external knowledge is not always necessary. Such ﬁndings demonstrate the potential of using Thrust to investigate the characteristics of tasks from the knowledge aspect.

4.3 L AYER ABLATION

 Since we cast instances into the representation space, a crucial contributing factor for Thrust is the layer of the PTLM to use. To investigate the effect of which layer to use, we conduct experiments on UniﬁedQA-3b with the same setting as in Section 3.1. Figure 4 presents the performance of adding 25%, 50%, 75% knowledge-augmented examples with Thrust using the hidden states of different layers. We can observe that, for most tasks, there is no signiﬁcant difference across lay- ers, which shows the robustness of Thrust and potential capacity to accelerate the computation of Thrust of using lower layers. However, for some tasks, such as StrategyQA and Web Questions , the middle-layer representation may worsen the overall performance. The reason can be that: early layers in the model contain rich semantic information, and later layers contain task-speciﬁc informa- tion (Lovering et al., 2021), so that both can act as good representation of the instances. However, in the middle layers, rich semantic features are abandoned during extracting task-speciﬁc features and task-speciﬁc features are also not fully extracted and expressed yet.

5 R ELATED W ORK

 PTLM with external knowledge. The paradigm of retrieving knowledge from knowledge bases, augmenting PTLMs, and solving downstream tasks has been widely explored in the community of NLP. The knowledge bases can range from knowledge graphs (Xu et al., 2021), documents (Paran- jape et al., 2022), pre-processed vectors (Verga et al., 2021), other PTLMs (Shwartz et al., 2020), 8 . search engines (Nakano et al., 2021), to Wikipedia documents as used in this work. To augment the PTLMs, common practice includes creating synthesizing datasets (Wu et al., 2021), adding knowl- edge to the prompts (Wei et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021), create demonstrations (Brown et al., 2020), and extending feature vectors (Khattab & Zaharia, 2020). In this work, we pioneer the study by adding the knowledge in the plain text format. However, since computing Thrust requires only the queries, not labels nor gold answers, during the test time, the method can be extended to any of these aforementioned settings. Hardness and Conﬁdence Estimation in PTLMs. Much previous work studies the estimation of dataset hardness and model conﬁdence under the context of PTLMs. For dataset hardness, RDA (Perez et al., 2021) measures the hardness as the cumulative area under the loss curves of cross-fold validation on the test set. Point-wise V -Usable information (Ethayarajh et al., 2022) com- putes the hardness as entropy difference between the feature-provided case and the blank feature case. Sensitivity Measurement (Hahn et al., 2021) measures the dataset difference by computing the variance of loss of the correct labels on a set of neighbor sentences extracted from generative models with masked original sentences as the inputs. These methods achieve great correlation with the model performance. However, all these methods focus on analyzing the test set performance, thus the test set labels are required and can not be applied when predicting the answers. Another line of work focuses on estimating the expected calibration errors (ECE) for classiﬁcation (Kong et al., 2020), QA (Jiang et al., 2021), and math (Lin et al., 2022) datasets, as a reﬂection of model certainty on the correct answers. ECE can be considered as an orthogonal evaluation metric to measure the model’s capability of understanding the tasks, compared to common metrics such as accuracy. Most of the previous work can be considered a posterior analysis of the model capability. In this work, instead, we estimate the pragmatic conﬁdence at the test time to empirically increase the performance with limited budget or bandwidth to acquire knowledge.

6 C ONCLUSION

 In this work, we propose I nstance-level A daptive P ropulsion of E xternal K nowledge (IAPEK) as a solution to propel model performance when the external knowledge is useful but noisy. Accordingly, we propose a simple and effective instance-wise metric, Thrust , to perform the adaptive knowledge injection. Extensive experiments show that Thrust can improve the performance of utilizing external knowledge under various settings. Understanding the delicate usage of potentially noisy knowledge for PTLMs can further enable the models to conduct inference beyond the limitation of implicit internal knowledge. 9

R EFERENCES

 10 11 ?id=Vr_BTpw3wz 12 13 14