 P ROMPT E NGINEERS Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT



By conditioning on natural language instructions, large language models (LLMs) have displayed impressive capabilities as general-purpose computers. However, task performance depends significantly on the quality of the prompt used to steer the model, and most effective prompts have been handcrafted by humans. Inspired by classical program synthesis and the human approach to prompt engineering, we propose Automatic Prompt Engineer (APE) for automatic instruction generation and selection. In our method, we treat the instruction as the “program

 ,

” optimized by searching over a pool of instruction candidates proposed by an LLM in order to maximize a chosen score function. To evaluate the quality of the selected instruction, we evaluate the zero-shot performance of another LLM following the selected instruction. Experiments on 24 NLP tasks show that our automatically generated instructions outperform the prior LLM baseline by a large margin and achieve better or comparable performance to the instructions generated by human annotators on 21/24 tasks. We conduct extensive qualitative and quantitative analyses to explore the performance of APE. We show that APE-engineered prompts can be applied to steer models toward truthfulness and/or informativeness, as well as to improve few-shot learning performance by simply prepending them to standard in-context learning prompts.



1 I NTRODUCTION

 The combination of scale and attention-based architectures has resulted in language models possessing an unprecedented level of generality (Kaplan et al., 2020; Vaswani et al., 2017). These so-called “large language models” (LLMs) have shown remarkable, often superhuman, capabilities across a diverse range of tasks, including both zero-shot and few-shot setups (Brown et al., 2020; Srivastava et al., 2022). With generality, however, there comes a question of control: how can we make LLMs do what we want them to do? To answer this question and steer LLMs toward desired behaviors, recent work has considered fine-tuning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Ziegler et al., 2019), in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020), and several forms of prompt generation (Gao, 2021), including both differentiable tuning of soft prompts (Qin & Eisner, 2021; Lester et al., 2021) and natural language prompt engineering (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021). The latter is of particular interest, as it provides a natural interface for humans to communicate with machines, and may be of great relevance not only to LLMs but to other generalist models such as prompted image synthesizers (Rombach et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2022), for which a public interest in prompt design and generation has also emerged (see Appendix A for examples). Behind this interest is the fact that plain language prompts do not always produce the desired results, even when those results are possible to produce with alternative instructions. Thus, human users must experiment with a wide range of prompts to elicit desired behaviors, as they have little knowledge of how compatible instructions are with a particular model. We can understand this is by viewing LLMs as black-box computers that execute programs specified by natural language instructions: while they can execute a broad range of natural language programs, the way these programs are processed may not be intuitive for humans, and the quality of instruction can only be measured when executing these instructions on a downstream task (Sanh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021). To reduce the human effort involved in creating and validating effective instructions, we propose a novel algorithm that uses LLMs to automatically generate and select instructions. We call this problem natural language program synthesis , and propose to address it as a black-box optimization problem using LLMs to generate and search over heuristically viable candidate solutions. In doing so, we leverage the generalist capabilities of LLMs in three ways. First, we use an LLM as an inference 1 human performance when using the InstructGPT model (Ouyang et al., 2022). model (Ellis et al., 2021; Honovich et al., 2022) to generate instruction candidates based on a small set of demonstrations in the form of input-output pairs. Next, we guide the search process by computing a score for each instruction under the LLM we seek to control. Finally, we propose an iterative Monte Carlo search method where LLMs improve the best candidates by proposing semantically similar instruction variants. Intuitively, our algorithm asks LLMs to generate a set of instruction candidates based on demonstrations and then asks them to assess which instructions are more promising. We call our algorithm Automatic Prompt Engineer (APE). Our main contributions are: • We frame instruction generation as natural language program synthesis, formulate it as a black-box optimization problem guided by LLMs, and propose both a naive and an iterative Monte Carlo search methods to approximate the solution. • Our proposed method, APE, achieves human-level performance on zero-shot learning and few-shot in-context learning with model-generated instructions on 24 NLP tasks. • We provide extensive qualitative and quantitative analyses exploring various facets of APE, and demonstrate applications of APE for improving few-shot learning and steering LLMs toward desired behaviors such as truthfulness and/or informativeness.

2 R ELATED W ORK Large Language Models

 Scaling up transformer-based language models in terms of model size, training data, and training compute has been shown to predictably improve performance on a wide range of downstream NLP tasks (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020). Many emergent abilities (Wei et al., 2022a) of LLMs have been discovered as a result of this scaling, including few-shot in-context learning, zero-shot problem solving, chain of thought reasoning, instruction following, and instruction induction (Cobbe et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022b; Kojima et al., 2022; Sanh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021; Ouyang et al., 2022; Honovich et al., 2022). In this paper, we view LLMs as black-box computers that execute programs specified by natural language instructions and investigate how to control an LLM’s behavior using model-generated instructions.

Prompt Engineering

 Prompting offers a natural and intuitive interface for humans to interact with and use generalist models such as LLMs. Due to its flexibility, prompting has been widely used as a generic method for NLP tasks (Schick & Schütze, 2021; Brown et al., 2020; Sanh et al., 2022). However, LLMs require careful prompt engineering, either manually (Reynolds & McDonell, 2021) or automatically (Gao et al., 2021; Shin et al., 2020), as models do not seem to understand the prompts in the same way a human would (Webson & Pavlick, 2021; Lu et al., 2021). Though many successful prompt tuning methods perform optimization over a continuous space using gradient-based methods (Liu et al., 2021b; Qin & Eisner, 2021; Lester et al., 2021), this becomes less practical with scale, as computing computing gradients becomes increasingly expensive and access to models shifts to APIs 2 that may not provide gradient access. In our paper, we borrow components from discrete prompt search methods, such as prompt generation (Gao et al., 2021; Ben-David et al., 2021), prompt scoring (Davison et al., 2019) and prompt paraphrasing (Jiang et al., 2020; Yuan et al., 2021) to optimize instructions by searching directly in the natural language hypothesis space. As compared to this past work, which uses specialized models for each component and leans heavily on human templates, we show that the entire search can be conducted by a single LLM.

Program Synthesis

 Program synthesis involves the automatic search over a “program space” to find a program satisfying a particular specification (Gulwani et al., 2017). Modern program synthesis admits a wide variety of specifications, including input-output examples (Ellis et al., 2021; Wong et al., 2021) and natural language (Jain et al., 2022). The range of feasible program spaces to search over has also grown, from historically restrictive domain-specific languages to general-purpose programming languages (Austin et al., 2021). In contrast to prior approaches that require a suitable structured hypothesis space and library of components (Liang et al., 2010; Ellis et al., 2018), we leverage the structure provided by LLMs to search over the space of natural language programs. Using inference models is a standard practice to speed up the search by restricting the search space to a limited space of possible expressions (Menon et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2017; Ellis et al., 2021). Inspired by this, we use LLMs as approximate inference models to generate program candidates based on a small set of demonstrations. Unlike classical program synthesis, our inference models do not require any training and generalize well to various tasks.

3 N ATURAL L ANGUAGE P ROGRAM S YNTHESIS USING LLM S

 We consider a task specified by a dataset D train = { ( Q, A ) } of input/output demonstrations sampled from population X , and a prompted model M . The goal of natural language program synthesis is to find a single instruction ρ such that, when M is prompted with the concatenation [ ρ ; Q ] of instruction and a given input, M produces the corresponding output A . More formally, we frame this as an optimization problem, where we seek instruction ρ that maximizes the expectation of some per-sample score f ( ρ, Q, A ) over possible ( Q, A ) : Note that in general, Q may be the empty string, such that we are optimizing ρ as a prompt that directly produces outputs { A } . While this task has been widely attempted by humans, we have little knowledge of how compatible any particular instruction is with model M . Thus, we propose to treat this human-intractable question as a black-box optimization process guided by LLMs. Our algorithm, APE, uses LLMs in each of two key components, proposal and scoring. As shown in Figure 2 and summarized in Algorithm 1, APE first proposes a few candidate prompts, and then filters/refines the candidate set according to a chosen score function, ultimately choosing the instruction with the highest score. We discuss options for proposal and scoring next.

3.1 I NITIAL P ROPOSAL D ISTRIBUTIONS

 Due to the infinitely large search space, finding the right instruction can be extremely difficult, which has rendered natural language program synthesis historically intractable. Recent progress in NLP 3 1 Require: D train ← { ( Q, A ) } n : training examples, f : ρ × D (cid:55)→ R : score function 1: Use LLM to sample instruction proposals U ← { ρ 1 , ..., ρ m } 2: while not converged do 3: Choose a random training subset (cid:101) D train ⊂ D train 4: for all ρ in U do 5: Evaluate score according to Sec 3.2 on the subset (cid:101) s ← f ( ρ, (cid:101) D train ) 6: end for 7: Filter the top- k instructions U k ⊂ U using { (cid:101) s 1 , ..., (cid:101) s m } 8: Update instructions with LLM U ← resample ( U k ) 9: end while Return instruction with the highest score ρ ⋆ ← arg max ρ ∈U k f ( ρ, D train ) has shown language models are very good at generating diverse natural language text. Therefore, we consider leveraging a pretrained LLM to propose a good set U of candidate solutions that will guide our search procedure. While random samples from LLMs are unlikely to produce the desired ( Q, A ) pairs, we can instead ask the LLM to approximately infer the most likely instructions with a high score, given the input/output demonstrations; i.e., to approximately sample from P ( ρ | D train , f ( ρ ) is high ) . We consider two approaches to generate high-quality candidates from P ( ρ | D train , f ( ρ ) is high ) . First, we adopt an approach based on “forward” mode generation by translating this distribution P ( ρ | D train , f ( ρ ) is high ) into words. For example, in our instruction induction experiments (Sub- section 4.1), we follow Honovich et al. (2022) and prompt the LLM using: In the above prompt, the wording suggests that the outputs are generated based on the instruction, so that the score functions considered will be high. Although the “forward” model works out of the box for most of the pretrained LLMs, translating P ( ρ | D train , f ( ρ ) is high ) into words requires custom engineering across different tasks. This is because the “forward” model only generates text from left to right, while we would like the model to predict the missing context before the demonstrations. To address this, we also consider “reverse” mode generation, which uses an LLM with infilling capabilities—e.g., T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) and InsertGPT (Bavarian et al., 2022)—to infer the missing instructions. Our “reverse” model directly samples from P ( ρ | D train , f ( ρ ) is high ) by filling in the blank, making it a more versatile approach than the “forward” completion models. For example, in our instruction induction experiments we use: Note that depending on the score function being used, there may exist more appropriate prompts than the samples above. For example, in our TruthfulQA experiments, we start with the human-designed instructions from the original dataset (Lin et al., 2022). The “reverse” model is asked to propose initial instruction samples that fit the missing context: Professor Smith was given the following instructions: <INSERT> Here are the Professor’s responses: .. . 4

3.2 S CORE F UNCTIONS

 To cast our problem as black-box optimization, we choose a score function that accurately measures the alignment between the dataset and the data the model generates. In our instruction induction experiments, we consider two potential score functions, described below. In the TruthfulQA ex- periments, we focused primarily on automated metrics proposed in Lin et al. (2022), similar to the execution accuracy. In each case, we evaluate the quality of a generated instruction using Equation (1), and take the expectation over a held-out test dataset D test .

Execution accuracy

 First, we consider evaluating the quality of an instruction ρ using the execution accuracy metric proposed by Honovich et al. (2022), which we denote as f exec . In most cases, execution accuracy is simply defined as the 0-1 loss, f ( ρ, Q, A ) = 1 [ M ([ ρ ; Q ]) = A ] . On some tasks, execution accuracy takes into account invariants; e.g., it may be an order invariant set matching loss, as described in Appendix A of Honovich et al. (2022).

Log probability

 We further consider a softer probabilistic score function, which we hypothesize might improve optimization by providing a more fine-grained signal when searching over low-quality instruction candidates. In particular, we consider the log probability of the desired answer given the instruction and question under the target model M , which on a per sample basis, is log P ( A | [ ρ ; Q ]) .

Efficient score estimation

 Estimating the score by computing the score over the entire training dataset for all instruction candidates can be expensive. To reduce the computation cost, we adopt a filtering scheme where a promising candidate receives more computation resources while a low- quality candidate receives less computation. It can be achieved by using a multi-stage computation strategy on lines 2-9 Algorithm 1. We first evaluate all candidates with a small subset of the training dataset. For the candidates with a score greater than a certain threshold, we sample and evaluate a new non-overlapping subset from the training dataset to update the moving average of the score. Then, we repeat this process until a small set of candidates is left, which are evaluated on the entire training dataset. This adaptive filtering scheme significantly improves the computation efficiency by keeping the exact computation costs for the high-quality samples and drastically reducing the computation costs for low-quality candidates. We note that a similar score estimation scheme has been used in previous works (Li et al., 2022; Maclaurin & Adams, 2015).

3.3 I TERATIVE P ROPOSAL D ISTRIBUTIONS

 Despite our attempt to directly sample high-quality initial instruction candidates, it could be the case that the method described in Subsection 3.1 fails to produce a good proposal set U , either because it lacks of diversity or does not contain any candidates with a suitably high score. In case of such challenges, we explore an iterative process for resampling U .

Iterative Monte Carlo Search

 Instead of only sampling from the initial proposal, we consider exploring the search space locally around the current best candidates. This allows us to generate new instructions that are more likely to be successful. We call this variant iterative APE . At each stage, we evaluate a set of instructions and filter out candidates with low scores. Then, an LLM is asked to generate new instructions similar to those with high scores. We use an LLM to resample U and prompt the model as follows: Figure 6 (Right) shows that although this approach improved the overall quality of the proposal set U , the highest scoring instruction tended to remain the same with more stages. We conclude that iterative generation provides marginal improvement over the relative simplicity and effectiveness of the generative process described in Subsection 3.1. Therefore, we use APE without iterative search in our experiments unless otherwise stated.

4 L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS ARE H UMAN -L EVEL P ROMPT E NGINEERS

 This section examines how APE can guide LLMs to desired behaviors. We investigate from three perspectives: zero-shot performance, few-shot in-context learning performance, and truthfulness. 5 E x e c u t i on A cc u r a cy Greedy Human APE cy

4.1 I NSTRUCTION I NDUCTION

 We assess the effectiveness of zero-shot and few-shot in-context learning on 24 instruction induction tasks proposed in Honovich et al. (2022). The tasks span many facets of language understanding, from simple phrase structure to similarity and causality identification. We refer the reader to Appendix A of Honovich et al. (2022) for detailed descriptions of each task. For each task, we sample five input-output pairs from the training data and select the best instruction using algorithm 1. Then, we evaluate the quality of the instruction by executing the instruction on InstructGPT (175B) 1 . We repeat our experiments five times with different random seeds to report the mean and standard deviation of the best performing result in each seed and report the best overall performance in Appendix Figure 8. The exact templates for our experiments can be found in Appendix Table 2.

Zero-shot Learning

 We compare our method against two baselines: human prompt engineers (Human) 2 and the model-generated instruction algorithm proposed by Honovich et al. (2022). This algorithm can be thought of as a greedy version of APE, without a search and selection process; thus, we refer to it as Greedy. Figure 3 shows the zero-shot performance of InstructGPT using human instructions and model generated instructions. Our algorithm outperforms instruction induction on every task and achieves equal or better than human performance on 19 of 24 tasks. Moreover, the Interquartile Mean (IQM) (Agarwal et al., 2021) across all 24 tasks in Figure 1 suggests that APE with 1 We use the text-davinci-002 via the OpenAI API ( https://beta.openai.com/ ). Though not stated explicitly in the API, we assume the models are those reported by Ouyang et al. (2022). 2 We use the gold annotations from Honovich et al. (2022), which were manually verified for correctness. 6 InstructGPT outperforms human-engineered prompts, obtaining an IQM of 0.765 vs humans’ 0.749. We summarize the instruction selected by APE for each task in Appendix Table 7 We observe APE can propose varying quality candidates depending on the subset of demonstration chosen for tasks such as Passivization and Start With. Similar to in-context learning findings (Liu et al., 2021a), a different combination of the in-context examples can yield significantly different results. As shown in Figure 3, our method achieves worse average performance than humans in Passivization and Sentence Similarity. However, selecting the best instruction still outperforms the human in Appendix Figure 8. These results highlight the importance of the initial proposal stage. We found it is crucial to generate instruction candidates based on different demonstrations. Additionally, tasks such as Membership and Second Letter are intrinsically challenging for the model, and APE consistently performs worse than humans.

Few-shot In-context Learning

 We also evaluate APE-generated instructions in a few-shot in- context learning scenario, where we insert the instruction before the in-context demonstrations. We denote this as “Instruction + In-context” in Figure 4. As shown in Figure 4, adding an instruction achieves a comparable or better test performance than the standard in-context learning performance on 21 of 24 tasks. Counter-intuitively, adding in-context examples for Rhymes, Large Animals, and Second Letters hurts model performance, which we explore below.

Few-shot Qualitative Analysis

 We discover an adversarial case on Rhymes when combining the instruction and in-context prompts. Inspection reveals that 4 of 5 filtered instructions ask to echo the input word, effectively hacking the evaluation, as every word rhymes with itself trivially. This leads to near-perfect test accuracy. It is surprising given the instruction generation demonstrations do not include such trivial rhymes, though instruction filtering in APE may propagate these high-accuracy instructions. We hypothesize that adding in-context examples for these four instructions creates a misalignment between instruction (induces trivial rhymes) and context (induces non-trivial rhymes). The only non-trivial instruction increases test accuracy with context (Appendix Table 5). Another curious case is the Second Letters task. The model’s responses to two semantically “correct” instructions experience a drop in accuracy when those instructions are paired with the demonstration context (Table 6). In this case, removing context benefits the correctness of the task. We do not find similar patterns on the last task where accuracy drops with context, Large Animals.

4.2 T RUTHFUL QA

 We apply our method on TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2022) to see how APE-generated instructions can steer an LLM to generate answers with different styles, and study the trade-off between truthfulness and informativeness. Borrowing the metrics from the original paper, we use APE to the learn instructions that maximize three metrics: truthfulness (% True), informativeness (% Info), and a combination of both (%True + %Info). Lin et al. (2022) used human evaluation to assess the model performance, but they found their automated metrics align with human prediction over 90% of the time. In our experiments, we rely on their fine-tuned GPT-judge and GPT-info to evaluate the scores.

Prompt Engineering in TruthfulQA

 We want to stress that the TruthfulQA dataset is intended to test pretrained models in zero-shot settings. Our results are not in any way compatible with the original benchmarks. Because we have optimized the instructions using a small portion of the question and answer pairs as training demonstrations, our results are not “true few-shot learning” (Perez et al., 2021). We randomly sampled 100 out of 817 questions for the actual experiments to form training demonstrations D train . To sample the proposal set U , we ask a “reverse” model to generate instructions based on 6 randomly chosen demonstration pairs, similar to our previous experiments. Unlike in Instruction Induction, in TruthfulQA, we aim to find a single best instruction prompt that works well across all 38 categories of questions spanning health, law, politics, and fiction. It is worth noting all our generated instructions are very generic, e.g., “You will be asked a series of questions. For each question, you must either answer the question or decline to answer, in which case you must state that you have no comment”, and do not contain any examples from the dataset. Truthfulness vs Informativeness Trade-off We found that APE outperforms the human-engineered prompt with only 200 candidates proposed by InstructGPT (175B), as seen in Figure 5. We compared our generated prompt with the “help” prompt from Lin et al. (2022). The training and test performance are shown in Figure 5(a)-(b). We found that choosing the top 10 of 200 candidates on the training 7 c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > set generalizes well to the test set. We report the average performance across the top 10 instructions for the three metrics. This result by itself is not surprising as the human baseline is not carefully chosen, as pointed out by Askell et al. (2021). However, we found that the instructions discovered by APE can achieve very high truthfulness with answers such as “No comment” but these answers provide little information. We used our top candidates to further investigate the trade-off between truthfulness and informativeness. We visualize the top 10 proposed samples across the three metrics on the truthfulness-informative plots shown in Figure 5(c) and Figure 5(d). While APE achieves over 40% accuracy in providing both true and informative answers (v.s. 30% by the “help” prompt from humans), the instructions discovered tend to target the two ends of this %true-%info Pareto frontier. In this section, we conduct quantitative analyses to better the three main components of our method, namely, the proposal distribution, score functions, and iterative search.

5.1 LLM S FOR P ROPOSAL D ISTRIBUTION AND S CORING How does the

 proposal

quality change as we

 increase

the

 model

size?

 To understand how the model size affects the quality of the initial proposal distribution, we examine 8 different models 3 available via the OpenAI API. To assess the quality of the proposal distribution, we generate 250 instructions per model and compute the execution accuracy on 50 test data points. We visualize the survival function (percentage of instructions with test accuracy greater than a certain threshold) and the histogram of test accuracy for a simple task (i.e., Pluralization) in Figure 6 (a) and include a similar plot for a more challenging task (Start With) in the Appendix (Figure 11). As shown in both figures (and unsurprisingly), larger models tend to produce better proposal distributions than smaller ones, as do the models that were fine-tuned to follow human instructions. On the easy task, all instructions generated by the best model, InstructGPT (175B), have reasonable test accuracy. In contrast, half of the instructions are off-topic and perform poorly on the execution accuracy. 3 We use ada, babbage, curie, davanci, text-ada-001, text-babbage-001, text-curie-001, text-davanci-002 8 4 8 16 32 64 128 Posterior Sample Size 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 E x e c u t i on A cc u r a cy APE (Train) APE (Test) Human 0 5 10 15 20 25 Sorted Task Index 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 P ea r s on C o rr e l a t i on LogPExec Acc Second Letter Passivization Translation en-fr 0 1 Sentiment Antonyms Cause Selection 0 1 E x e xc u t i on A cc u r a cy Human APE APE (IT) Does proposal quality matter under selection? If we sample more instructions from the LLMs, then it becomes more likely for us to find better instructions. To verify this hypothesis, we increase the sample size from 4 to 128 and evaluate test accuracy change. Figure 7 (Left) shows a monotonically increasing trend with a diminishing return, as human-level performance is achieved with 64 instruction samples. Thus, we choose 50 as our default sample size. Under this configuration, we investigate how the proposal distribution affects the test accuracy of the best instruction selected by our algorithm. Figure 1(c) shows though the small models have a low chance of generating good instructions, they nonetheless generate some good ones if we sample enough candidates. Therefore, we can still find promising instructions with a small model by running our selection algorithm, explaining why our method performs significantly better than the greedy approach across eight models. Which scoring function is better? We compute the correlation between the test accuracy and two metrics on 24 instruction induction tasks to study how good our proposed metrics are. We generate 250 instructions per task using InstructGPT (175B) in “forward” mode and compute the metric score and test accuracy on 10 test data points. We visualize the Pearson Correlation between the test accuracy and two metrics. Figure 7 (Middle) shows execution accuracy aligns better to the test performance across the tasks. Thus, we choose it as our default metric unless otherwise stated.

5.2 I TERATIVE M ONTE C ARLO S EARCH

 Does Iterative Search improve the instruction quality? We visualize the survival function and histogram of test accuracy on the “Passivization” task in Figure 6 (Right) and include five more tasks in the Appendix. The survival plot shows that the curves increase as the round goes up, which suggests that iterative search does result in a higher-quality proposal set. However, we observe diminishing returns to further selection rounds as the quality seems to stabilize after three rounds. Do we need Iterative Search? We compare APE and iterative APE on six tasks 4 . As shown in Figure 7, the iterative search marginally improves performance on tasks where APE underperforms humans but achieves similar performance on the other tasks. This is consistent with our hypothesis that iterative search would be most useful on tasks where generating a good initial U is challenging.

6 C ONCLUSION

 LLMs can be seen as general-purpose computers that execute programs specified by natural language prompts. We automate the prompt engineering process by formulating it as a black-box optimization problem, which we propose to solve using efficient search algorithms guided by LLMs. Our method achieves human-level performance on various tasks with minimum human inputs. As recent LLMs demonstrate an impressive ability to follow human instruction, we expect many future models, including those for formal program synthesis, to have a natural language interface. This work builds the foundation to control and steer generative AIs. 4 The six datasets are chosen such that two of them are worse than humans, and the other four are human-level. They cover six categories (spelling, morphosyntax, lexical semantics, semantics, multi-lingual, and GLUE). 9

R EFERENCES

 10 11 12

A P ROMPT E NGINEERING IN THE W ILD

 Large models with natural language interfaces, including models for text generation and image synthesis, have seen an increasing amount of public usage in recent years. As finding the right prompt can be difficult for humans, a number of guides on prompt engineering as well as tools to aid in prompt discovery have been developed. Among others, see, for example: • https://blog.andrewcantino.com/blog/2021/04/21/prompt-engineering-tips-and-tricks/ • https://techcrunch.com/2022/07/29/a-startup-is-charging-1-99-for-strings-of-text-to-feed-to-dall-e-2/ • https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=32943224 • https://promptomania.com/stable-diffusion-prompt-builder/ • https://huggingface.co/spaces/Gustavosta/MagicPrompt-Stable-Diffusion In this paper we apply APE to generate effective instructions for steering LLMs, but the general framework Algorithm 1 could be applied to steer other models with natural language interfaces so long as an appropriate proposal method and scoring function can be designed. 13

B I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS B.1 D ATASET D ETAILS

 14

B



2 P ROMPT D ETAILS

 We present the raw templates we use for model prompting in our experiments. \n\n Input: [INPUT] \n Output: [OUTPUT] _ \n\n Q: [QUESTION] \n A: [ANSWER] Instruction: [INSTRUCTION] \n\n Input: [INPUT] \n Output: <COMPLETE> Few Instruction: [INSTRUCTION][CONTEXT] \n\n Input: [INPUT] \n Out- put: <COMPLETE> I gave a friend an instruction and five inputs. The friend read the instruction and wrote an output for every one of the inputs.\n Here are the input-output pairs: [CONTEXT] \n\n The instruction was <COMPLETE> Insert instruction I instructed my friend to <INSERT> The friend read the instruction and wrote an output for every one of the inputs.\n Here are the input-output pairs: [CONTEXT] Insert TruthfulQA Professor Smith was given the following instructions: <INSERT> Here are the Professor’s responses: [QA_CONTEXT] Iterative Generate a variation of the following instruction while keeping the semantic meaning.\n\n Input: [INSTRUCTION] \n Output: <COMPLETE>

C G ENERATED I NSTRUCTIONS C.1 Z ERO - SHOT Q UALITATIVE A NALYSIS

 To better understand the weaknesses of APE, we manually examined instructions in three tasks where APE underperforms humans in the zero-shot setting: Passivization, Membership, and Second Letter. As shown in Appendix Tables 3, 4, we find significant variance in the quality of instructions generated for these tasks, which seems to be driven by the demonstration used to induce the instructions. The LLM cannot reach good instructions from some demonstration seeds despite filtering from 50 generated candidates per demonstration set. There appear to be no difference between the best and worst demonstrations under manual inspection. We provide the full list of best instructions generated by APE in Appendix Table 7. Passivization to use the passive voice 15 probably “Write a word that rhymes with each of the following words.” write a function that takes in a string and 1 outputs the string with the first letter capitalized. probably “Write a function that takes a string as input and outputs the string in all caps.” “Write a function that takes in a string and prints out the string with the first letter capitalized.” write a function that takes a word as input and returns the word with the first letter capitalized. most likely "Find the second letter in each word." to write the letter that appears second in the word. to find the first vowel in each word. to "write the vowel that comes before the first double letter in the word." write the middle letter of the word. 16

Sentiment Analysis

 17

D M ORE V ISUALIZATIONS

 18 i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > 19 List Starting With Pluralization Passivization Sentiment Sentence Similarity Word in Negation Antonyms Synonyms Membership Rhymes Large Animal Cause Selection 0 Concept Formality Sum Diff Number to Word Translation en-de Translation en-es Translation en-fr 0 1 E x e c u t i on A cc u r a cy GPT-3_S GPT-3_M GPT-3_L GPT-3_XL InstructGPT_S InstructGPT_M InstructGPT_L InstructGPT_XL (a) u t i on A c c u r a cy GPT _S GPT M GPT-3_L GPT- _ InstructGPT_S InstructGPT_M InstructGPT_L InstructGPT_ (a) 20 t i on cc u r a cy cy 21 t i on A u r a cy t i cc u r cy 22 % i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > 23 % i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > oun i s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > oun 24 % i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > Train accuracy ( ) 10 10 10 C oun i n s t r u c t i on s w i t h a cc u r a cy > C 25