

R EPRESENTATION AND B IAS IN M ULTILINGUAL NLP: I NSIGHTS FROM C ONTROLLED E XPERIMENTS ON C ONDITIONAL L ANGUAGE M ODELING

 Anonymous authors Paper under double-blind review

A BSTRACT

 Inspired by the phenomenon of performance disparity between languages in ma- chine translation, we investigate whether and to what extent languages are equally hard to “conditional-language-model”. Our goal is to improve our understanding and expectation of the relationship between language, data representation, size, and performance in one-to-one conditional language modeling through a series of systematically controlled experiments with the Transformer and parallel data on the 6 diverse, ofﬁcial languages of the United Nations — in 30 directions, 5 sizes, and 3 primary representation types in character, byte, and word, along with 5 alternate variants for a secondary set of controls. We observe indications suggesting a script bias on the character level, a length bias on the byte level, and a word bias that gives rise to a hierarchy in performance across languages. We also identify two types of sample-wise non-monotonicity — while word-based representations are prone to exhibit Double Descent, length can induce unstable performance across the size range studied in a novel meta phenomenon which we term erraticity . By eliminating statistically signiﬁcant performance disparity on the character and byte levels, we show that, in the context of computing with the Transformer, there is no complexity intrinsic to languages other than that related to their statistical attributes and that performance disparity is not a necessary condition but a byproduct of word segmentation. Our application of statistical comparisons as a fairness measure also serves as a novel rigorous method for the intrinsic evaluation of languages, resolving a decades-long debate on language complexity. We hope our work helps open up new directions in the area of language and computing that would be fairer and more ﬂexible.

1 I NTRODUCTION

 With a transdisciplinary approach to explore a space at the intersection of Deep Learning (DL) / Neural Networks (NNs), domain science, and language engineering, we report our undertaking in use-inspired basic research — with an application-related phenomenon as inspiration, we seek fundamental scientiﬁc understanding through empirical experimentation. This is not an application or machine translation (MT) paper, but one that strives to evaluate and seek new insights on language in the context of DL with a consideration to contribute to our evaluation, segmentation, and model interpretation practice in multilingual Natural Language Processing (NLP). Our inspiration : performance disparity in MT The use case that inspired our investigation is the disparity of MT results reported in Junczys-Dowmunt et al. (2016). Of the 6 ofﬁcial languages of the United Nations (UN) — Arabic (AR), English (EN), Spanish (ES), French (FR), Russian (RU), and Chinese (ZH), results with target languages AR, RU, and ZH seem to be worse than those with EN/ES/FR, regardless of the algorithm, may it be from phrased-based Statistical MT (SMT/Moses (Koehn et al., 2007)) or Neural MT (NMT). 1 The languages have the same amount of line-aligned, 1 We provide a re-visualization of these grouped in 6 facets by target language in Figure 4 in Appendix A. 1 high-quality parallel data available for training, evaluation, and testing. This prompts the question: are some languages indeed harder to translate from or to?

1.1 P ROBLEM STATEMENT

 Are all languages equally hard to Conditional-Language-Model (CLM)? A similar question concerning (monolingual) language modeling (LMing) was posed in Cotterell et al. (2018) and Mielke et al. (2019) along with the introduction of a method to evaluate LMs with multiway parallel corpora (multitexts) in information-theoretic terms. In order to eliminate confounds associated with generation and other evaluation metrics that would differ from the one used in training and to explicitly focus on modeling the complexities that may or may not be intrinsic to the languages, we study the more fundamental process of CLMing, with a bilingual setup where perplexity of one target language ( l trg ) is estimated given the parallel data in one source language ( l src ), where l src (cid:54) = l trg . We do not perform any translation, rather, one could think of our effort as estimating conditional probabilities with the Transformer. Furthermore, we focus on the very basics and examine the ﬁrst step in our pipeline — input representation, holding everything else constant. Instead of measuring absolute cross-entropy scores, we evaluate the relative differences between languages from across 5 magnitudes of data sizes in 3 different representation types/levels. Disparity in how the Transformer “sees”/classiﬁes languages exists, if/when the differences are statistically signiﬁcant.

1.2 S UMMARY OF FINDINGS AND CONTRIBUTIONS

 In investigating performance disparity as a function of size and data with respect to language and representation on the Transformer, we ﬁnd: 1. in a bilingual (one-to-one) CLMing setup, there is neutralization of source language instances , i.e. there are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between source languages (when comparing them pairwise). Only pairs of target languages differ signiﬁcantly (see Table 1). 2. We identify 2 types of sample-wise non-monotonicity on each of the primary representation levels we studied: (a) Double Descent (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2020): on the word level, for all languages, performance at 10 2 lines is typically better than at 10 3 before it improves again at 10 4 and beyond. This phenomenon can also be observed in character models with ZH as a target language as well as on the word level with non-neural n-gram LMs; (b) erraticity : performance is irregular and exhibits great variance across runs. We ﬁnd sequence length to be predictive of this phenomenon. We show that this can be rectiﬁed by data transformation or hyperparameter tuning. In our study, erraticity affects AR and RU on the byte level where the sequences are too long with UTF-8 encoding and ZH when decomposed into strokes on the character level. 3. In eliminating performance disparity on 6 diverse languages such that there are no statistically signiﬁcant differences between any of the 15 language pairs through lossless data transformation (or hyperparameter tuning) on the character and byte level, we show that unless word-based methods are used, there is no complexity that is intrinsic to a language aside from its statistical properties concerning sequence length and vocabulary, irrespective of its lin- guistic typological, phylogenetic, historical, or geographical proﬁle . Language complexity is relative to and bounded by its representation level (representation relativity). The conventional expectation that languages should/must be different based on extra-statistical grounds stems from the concept of a “word” and from our tradition of word-based segmentation practice. We ﬁnd explicitly debunking this expectation of disparity necessary because more diligent error analyses need to be afforded instead of simply accepting massively disparate results . 4. Bigger/overparametrized models can exacerbate the effect of data statistics. Biases that can be expressed quantitatively and lead to disparity are mitigable through hyperparameter tuning. Outline of the paper In § 2, we deﬁne our method and experimental setup. We present our results and analyses on the primary representations in § 3 and those from secondary set of controls in § 4 in a progressive manner to ease understanding. Meta analyses including fairness evaluation and discussion on non-monotonic behavior are in § 5, related work in § 6. We suggest some possibilities for future directions as we conclude in § 7. We refer our readers to the Appendices for more detailed descriptions/discussions and supplementary experiments. 2

2 M ETHOD AND DEFINITIONS

 Controlled experiments as basic research for scientiﬁc understanding Using the United Na- tions Parallel Corpus (Ziemski et al., 2016), the data from which the MT results in Junczys-Dowmunt et al. (2016) stem, we perform a series of controlled experiments on the Transformer, holding the hyperparameter settings for all 30 one-to-one language directions from the 6 languages constant while controlling for size (from 10 2 to 10 6 lines) and language with respect to representational granularity. We examine 3 primary representation types — character, byte (UTF-8), and word, and upon encountering some unusual phenomena, we perform a secondary set of controls with 5 alternate representations — on the character level: Pinyin and Wubi (ASCII representations for ZH phones and character strokes, respectively), on the byte level: code page 1256 (for AR) and code page 1251 (for RU), and on the word level: Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) (Sennrich et al., 2016), an adapted com- pression algorithm from Gage (1994). These symbolic variants allow us to manipulate the statistical properties of the representations, while staying as “faithful” to the language as possible. We adopt this symbolic data-centric approach because we would like to more directly interpret the confounds, if any, that make language data different from other data types. We operate on a smaller data size range as this is more common in traditional domain science and one of our higher goals is to bridge an understanding between language science and engineering (the latter being the dominant focus in NLP). We run statistical tests to identify the strongest correlates of performance and to assess whether the differences between the mean performance of different groups are indeed signiﬁcant. We are concerned not with the absolute scores, but with the relations between scores from different languages and the generalizations derived therefrom.

2.1 D EFINITIONS

 Information-theoretic, fair evaluation with multitexts Most sequence-to-sequence models are optimized using a cross-entropy loss (see Appendix B for deﬁnition). Cotterell et al. (2018) propose to use “renormalized” perplexity (PP) to evaluate LMs fairly using the total number of bits divided by some constant. In our case, we choose instead a simpler method of using an “unnormalized” PP, directly using the total number of bits needed to encode the development (dev) set, which has a constant size of 3,077 lines per language. Disparity/Inequality In the context of our CLMing experiments, we consider there to be “dis- parity” or “inequality” between languages l 1 and l 2 if there are signiﬁcant differences between the performance distributions of these two languages with respect to each representation. Here, by performance we mean the number of bits required to encode the held-out data using a trained CLM. With 30 directions, there are 15 pairs of source languages ( l src 1 , l src 2 ) and 15 pairs of target languages ( l trg 1 , l trg 2 ) possible. To assess whether the differences are signiﬁcant, we perform unpaired two-sided signiﬁcance tests with the null hypothesis that the score distributions for the two languages are not different. Upon testing for normality with the Shapiro-Wilk test (Shapiro & Wilk, 1965; Royston, 1995), we use the parametric unpaired two-sample Welch’s t-test (Welch, 1947) (when normal) or the non-parametric unpaired Wilcoxon test (Wilcoxon, 1945) (when not normal) for the comparisons. We use the implementation in R (R Core Team, 2014) for these 3 tests. To account for the multiple comparisons we are performing, we correct all p-values using Bonferroni’s correction (Benjamini & Heller, 2008; Dror et al., 2017) and follow Holm’s procedure 2 (Holm, 1979; Dror et al., 2017) to identify the pairs of l 1 and l 2 with signiﬁcant differences after correction. We report all 3 levels of signiﬁcance ( α ≤ 0 . 05 , 0 . 01 , 0 . 001 ) for a more holistic evaluation. Experimental setup The systematic, identical treatment we give to our data is described as follows with further preprocessing and hyperparameter details in Appendices B and C, respectively. The distinctive point of our experiment is that the training regime is the same for all (rationale in App. N.1). After ﬁltering length to 300 characters maximum per line in parallel for the 6 languages, we made 3 subsets of the data with 1 million lines each — one having lines in the order of the original corpus (dataset A) and two other randomly sampled (without replacement) from the full corpus (datasets B & C). Lines in all datasets are extracted in parallel and remain fully aligned for the 6 languages. For each run and each representation, there are 30 pairwise directions (i.e. one l src to one l trg ) that 2 using implementation from https://github.com/rtmdrr/replicability-analysis-NLP 3 result from the 6 languages. We trained all 150 (for 5 sizes) 6-layer Transformer models for each run using the SOCKEYE Toolkit (Hieber et al., 2018). We optimize using PP and use early stopping if no PP improvement occurs after 3 checkpoints up to 50 epochs maximum, taking the best checkpoint. Characters and bytes are supposed to mitigate the out-of-vocabulary (OOV) problem on the word level. In order to assess the effect of modeling with ﬁner granularity more precisely, all vocabulary items appearing once in the train set are accounted for (i.e. full vocabulary on train, as in Gerz et al. (2018a;b)). But we allow our system to categorize all unknown items in the dev set to be unknown (UNK) so to measure OOVs (open vocabulary on dev (Jurafsky & Martin, 2009)). To identify correlates of performance, we perform Spearman’s correlation (Spearman, 1904) with some basic statistical properties of the data (e.g. length, vocabulary size ( | V | ), type-token-ratio, OOV rate) as metrics — a complete list thereof is provided in Appendix E. For each of the 3 primary representations — character, byte, and word, we performed 5 runs total in 5 sizes ( 10 2 - 10 6 lines) (runs A0, B0, C0, A1, & A2) and 7 more runs in 4 sizes ( 10 2 - 10 5 lines) (A3-7, B1, & C1), also controlling for seeds. For the alternate/secondary representations, we ran 3 runs each in 5 sizes ( 10 2 - 10 6 lines) (A0, B0, & C0).

3 E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF PRIMARY REPRESENTATIONS

 nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (b) BYTE 500000 1000000 1500000 2000000 2500000 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (c) WORD AR EN ES FR RU ZH 1000000 1500000 1000000 1500000 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFR RUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (d) CHAR by target AR EN ES FR RU ZH 1000000 1500000 2000000 2500000 1000000 1500000 2000000 2500000 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFR RUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (e) BYTE by target AR EN ES FR RU ZH 800000 1000000 1200000 800000 1000000 1200000 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFR RUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (f) WORD by target (g) (h) We should remind our readers that our goal is to investigate the presence of relative differences between the languages and not to directly compare absolute scores for what is “better” or “worse”. There are many perspectives and set of ﬁndings possible, and our experiments here present one 4 perspective, one ﬁrst attempt towards characterizing the behavior of the Transformer. What should be considered relevant results for our investigation is the number of language pairs with signiﬁcant differences reported in Table 1, the general patterns of (non-)monotonicity and disparity in the ﬁgures, and the corresponding analyses. Subﬁgures 1a, 1b, and 1c present the mean results across 12 runs of the 3 primary representations — character, byte, and word, respectively. The x-axis represents data size in number of lines and y-axis the total conditional cross-entropy, measured in bits (Eq. 1). Each line connects 5 data points corresponding to the number of bits the CLMs (trained with training data of 10 2 , 10 3 , 10 4 , 10 5 , and 10 6 lines) need to encode the target language dev set given the corresponding text in the source language. These are the same data in the same 30 language directions and 5 sizes with the same training regime, just segmented differently. This conﬁrms representation relativity — languages (or any objects being modeled) need to be evaluated relative to their representation. “One size does not ﬁt all” (Durrani et al., 2019), our conventional way of referring to “language” (as a socio-cultural product or with traditional symbolic approaches, or even for most multilingual tasks and competitions) is too coarse-grained. Subﬁgures 1d, 1e, and 1f display the corresponding information sorted into facets by target language, source languages represented as line types. Through these we see more clearly that results can be grouped rather neatly by target language (cf. ﬁgures sorted by source language in Appendix G) — as implicit in Transformer’s architecture, the decoder is unaware of the source language in the encoder. As shown in Table 1 in § 5 summarizing the number of source and target language pairs with signiﬁcant differences, there are no signiﬁcant differences across any source language pairs . The Transformer neutralizes source language instances. This could explain why transfer learning or multilingual/zero-shot translation (Johnson et al., 2017) is possible at all on a conceptual level. In general, for character and byte models, most language directions do seem to converge at 10 4 lines to similar values across all target languages, with few notable exceptions. There are some ﬂuctuations past 10 4 , indicating further tuning of hyperparameters would be beneﬁcial due to our present setting possibly working most favorably for 10 4 . On the character level, target language ZH (ZH trg ) shows a different learning pattern throughout. And on the byte level, AR trg and RU trg display non-monotonic and unstable behavior, which we refer to as erratic . Word models exhibit Double Descent across the board (note the spike at 10 3 ), but overall, difﬁcult/easy languages stay consistent, with AR and RU being the hardest, followed by ES and FR, then EN and ZH. A practical takeaway from this set of experiments: in order to obtain more robust training results, use bytes for ZH and characters for AR and RU — also if one wanted to avoid any “class” problems in performance disparity with words. Performance disparity for these representations is reported in Table 1 under “CHAR”, “BYTE”, and “WORD”. Do note, however, that the intrinsic performance of ZH with word segmentation is not particularly subpar. But this often does not correlate with its poorer downstream tasks results (recall results from Junczys-Dowmunt et al. (2016)). And since the notion of word in ZH is highly contested and ambiguous — 1) it is often aimed to align with that in other languages so to accommodate manual feature engineering and academic theories, 2) there is great variation among different conventions, 3) native ZH speakers identify characters as words, there are reasons to rethink this procedure now that fairer processing in ﬁner granularity is possible (cf. Li et al. (2019b) as well as Duanmu (2017) for a summary of the contested nature of wordhood in ZH). A more native analysis of ZH, despite being considered a high-resource language, has not yet been recognized in NLP.

4 U NDERSTANDING THE PHENOMENA WITH ALTERNATE REPRESENTATIONS

 To understand why some languages show different results than others, we carried out a secondary set of control experiments with representations targeting the problematic statistical properties of the corresponding target languages. (An extended version of this section is provided in Appendix O.) Character level We reduced the high | V | in ZH with representations in ASCII characters — Pinyin and Wubi. The former is a romanization of ZH characters based on their pronunciations and the latter an input algorithm that decomposes character-internal information into stroke shape and ordering and matches these to 5 classes of radicals (Lunde, 2008). We replaced the ZH data with these formats only on the target side and reran the experiments involving ZH trg on the character level. Results in Figure 2 and Table 1 show that the elimination of disparity on character level is possible if ZH is represented 5 500000 1000000 1500000 2000000 2500000 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH ( AR EN ES FR RU ZH 1000000 1500000 2000000 1000000 1500000 2000000 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+ of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG 1e+ 1e nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH AR EN ES FR RU ZH 1e+03 1e+ 1e+ 1e+05 1e+ 1e+ of nu m be r o f b i t TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH 2500000 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH AR EN ES FR RU ZH 1e 1e 1e 1e 1e nu m be r o f b i t s TRG SRC ARENESFRRUZH 500000 1000000 1500000 2000000 2500000 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH (c) BPE AR EN ES FR RU ZH 900000 1200000 1500000 900000 1200000 1500000 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 1e+03 1e+05 number of lines nu m be r o f b i t s TRG ARENESFRRUZH SRC ARENESFRRUZH through Pinyin (transliteration), as in Subﬁgure 2c. But models with ZH logographic scripts form a behaviorial tendency unlike those with other (phonetic) alphabetic scripts (Subﬁgure 2a). To the best of our knowledge, work published thus far using Wubi with the Transformer seems to have needed some form of architectural modiﬁcation (Gao et al., 2020) or a different architecture altogether (Nikolov et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2019), suggesting a possible script bias. Byte level Length is the most salient statistical attribute that makes AR and RU outliers. To shorten their sequence length, we tested with alternate encodings on AR trg and RU trg — code page 1256 and 1251, which provide 1-byte encodings speciﬁc to AR and RU, respectively. Results are shown in Subﬁgures 3a and 3b. Not only is erraticity resolved, the number of 15 possible target language pairs with signiﬁcant differences reduces from 8 with the UTF-8 byte representation to 0 (Table 1 under “ARRU t ”), indicating that we eliminated disparity with this optimization heuristic. Since our heuristic is a lossless and reversible transform, it shows that a complexity that is intrinsic and necessary in language 3 does not exist in computing, however diverse they may be, as our 6 are, from the conventional linguistic typological, phylogenetic, historical, or geographical perspectives. Please refer to Appendix I for our discussion on language complexity. Word level The main difference between word and character/byte models is length not being a top contributing factor correlating with performance, but instead | V | is. This is understandable as word segmentation neutralizes sequence lengths. To remedy the OOV problem, we use BPE, which learns a ﬁxed vocabulary of variable-length character sequences (on word level, as it presupposes word 3 aside from its statistical properties related to length and vocabulary. “Language” here refers to language represented through all representations . 6 segmentation) from the training data. It is more ﬁne-grained than word segmentation and is known for its capability to model subword units for morphologically complex languages (e g. AR and RU). We use the same vocabulary of 30,000 as speciﬁed in Junczys-Dowmunt et al. (2016). This reduced our averaged OOV token rate by 89-100% across the 5 sizes. The number of language pairs with signiﬁcant differences reduced to 7 from 8 for word models, showing how ﬁner-grained modeling has a positive effect on mitigating the word bias and closing the disparity gap

5 M ETA - RESULTS , ANALYSIS , AND DISCUSSION

 Performance disparity Table 1 lists the number of language pairs with signiﬁcant differences under the representations studied. Considering how it is possible for our character and byte models to effect no performance disparity for the same languages on the same data, this indicates that disparity is not a necessary condition. In fact, the customary expectation that languages ought to perform differently stems from our word segmentation practice. Furthermore, the order of AR/RU > ES/FR > EN/ZH resembles the idea of morphological complexity. Considering there are character-internal (morphologically) meaningful units in languages with logographic script such as ZH (cf. Zhang & Komachi (2018)) that are rarely captured or studied, this goes to show that linguistic morphology, along with its complexity, as is practiced today and that which has occurred in the NLP discourse thus far, has only been relevant on and is bounded to the “word” level. The deﬁnition of word has been recognized as problematic for a very long time in language science (see Haspelmath (2011) and references therein from the past century). Since the notion of word, which has been centered on English and languages with alphabetic scripts, has negative impact on languages both morphologically rich (see Minkov et al. (2007), Seddah et al. (2010), inter alia) as well as morphologically “frugal” (Koehn, 2005), ﬁner-grained modeling with characters and bytes (or n-gram variants/pieces thereof) is indeed a more sensible option and enables a greater variety of languages to be handled with more simplicity, fairness, independence, and ﬂexibility. While the lack of signiﬁcant differences between pairs of source languages would signify neutraliza- tion of source language instances, it does not mean that source languages have no effect on target. For our byte solutions with code pages, we experimented also with source side optimization in the directions that involve AR/RU as source. This affected the distribution of the disparity results for that representation — with 2 pairs being signiﬁcantly different (see Table 1 under “ARRU s,t ”). Double Descent (DD) We notice word models and character models with ZH trg , i.e. models with high target | V | , are prone to exhibit a spike at 10 3 . A common pattern for these is the ratio of target training token count to number of parameters falls into O( 10 − 4 ) for 10 2 lines, O( 10 − 3 ) at 10 3 , O( 10 − 2 ) at 10 4 , and O( 10 − 1 ) for 10 5 lines and so on. But for more atomic units such as alphabetic (not logographic) characters (may it be Latin, Cyrillic, or Abjad) and for bytes, this progression instead begins at O( 10 − 3 ) at 10 2 lines. Instead of thinking this spike of 10 3 as irregular, we may instead want to think of this learning curve as shifted by 1 order of magnitude to the right for characters and bytes or the performance at 10 2 lines for words and ZH-characters due to being overparametrized and hence abnormal. This would ﬁt in with the ﬁndings by Belkin et al. (2019) and Nakkiran et al. (2020) attributing DD to overparametrization. If we could use this ratio and logic of higher | V | to automatically detect “non-atomic” units, ones that can be further decomposed, this observation could potentially be beneﬁcial for advancing other sciences, e.g. biology. Details of our supplemental experiments on the datasets used by the Nakkiran et al. (2020) corroborating our 7 ﬁndings as well as results additional experiments on a non-neural LM are provided in Appendix J. Number of model parameters can be found in Appendix K. Erraticity We observe another type of sample-wise non-monotonicity, one that signals irregular and unstable performance across data sizes and runs. Within one run, erraticity can be observed directly as changes in direction on the y-axis. Across runs, large variance can be observed, even with the same dataset (see Figure 18 in Appendix L). Erraticity can also be observed indirectly through a negative correlation between data size and performance. Many work on length bias in NMT have focused on solutions related to search, e.g. Murray & Chiang (2018). Our experiments show that a kind of length bias can surface already with CLMing, without generation taking place. If the connection between erraticity and length bias can indeed be drawn, it could strengthen the case for global conditioning (Sountsov & Sarawagi, 2016). (See Appendix L for more discussion and results.) Script bias, erraticity, word bias — are these necessary conditions? To assess whether the observed phenomena are particular to this one setting, we performed one run with dataset A in 4 sizes with the primary representations on 1-layer Transformers (see Appendix M). We observed no signiﬁcant disparity across the board. It seems larger/overparametrized models can magnify and exacerbate the differences in the statistical properties in the data. That hyperparameter tuning, in this case, by changing the number of layers can mitigate effects from the data statistics, to the best of our knowledge, is a novel insight, suggesting also that a general expectation of monotonic development as data size increases can indeed be held. Our other ﬁndings remain consistent (source language neutralization and DD on word level).

6 R ELATED WORK

 Many related work have already been mentioned in our analyses in passing. One main point, however, that we ﬁnd pertinent to emphasize is the (ir-)relevance of linguistic typology in multilingual NLP. Many recent work have advocated its relevance (Gerz et al., 2018b; Clark et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2020). However, not many researchers are aware of how the modeling of many of these word-based symbolic concepts could bias NLP systems due to the modeling of a notion of “word” that is not crosslinguistically consistent and that we could be doing a disservice to many other languages. That basic data statistics being the driver of success in performance in multilingual modeling has so far only been explicitly argued for in Mielke et al. (2019). We go beyond their work in monolingual LMs to study CLMs and evaluate also in relation to data size, representation granularity and quantitative and qualitative fairness. We make a ﬁner distinction demarcating when linguistic typological concepts could be relevant (possibly on word level and when they are being explicitly modeled) and when they are not. To the best of our knowledge, there has been no prior work on demonstrating the neutralization of source language instances through statistical comparisons, a numerical analysis on DD for sequence-to-sequence models, the meta phenomenon of a sample-wise non-monotonicity (erraticity) being related to length, or the connection between effects of data statistics and modiﬁcation in architectural depth. Other related work can be found in Appendix P.

7 C ONCLUSION

 Machine learning has enabled greater diversity in NLP (Joshi et al., 2020). Fairness, in the elimination of disparity, does not require big data. It will take everyone’s effort to mitigate the bias in ourselves and to support fairness in modeling instead of sticking to a convenient standard that serves only languages that have been dominant in our academic tradition or engineering practice. Resources can be invested in e.g. building character encoding that complement languages’ statistical proﬁles (considering the basis of many things multilingual goes back to the Multilingual Plane), ﬁner-grained science for NLP (e.g. studying the relation between data transform and algorithm/hyperparameter adjustment, alignment of elements between logographic and (phonetic) alphabetic scripts), decompo- sition analyses for characters, better compression schemes, as well as the creation and curation of multitexts and stylistic/multimodal contrast sets that are non-artiﬁcial, because we need to understand the diversity of the natural statistical proﬁles/behaviors of the world’s languages, in raw (not pretok- enized) form, also for the purpose of evaluation and education in a statistical science for NLP beyond the explicit modeling of word-based concepts. 8

R EFERENCES

 pii/S0885230899901286 9 10 11 for Computational . /v1/W18-6322. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W18-6322 . 12 13 14