\title{Linking Finite-Time Lyapunov Exponents to RNN Gradient Subspaces and Input Sensitivity}

\begin{abstract}
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are ubiquitous computing systems for sequences and multivariate time series data. They can be viewed as non-autonomous dynamical systems which can be analyzed using dynamical systems tools, such as Lyapunov Exponents. In this work, we derive and analyze the components of RNNs' Finite Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE) which measure directions (vectors Q) and factors (scalars R) with which the distance between nearby trajectories expands or contracts over finite-time horizons. We derive an expression for RNN gradients in terms of $Q$ vectors and $R$ values and demonstrate a direct connection between these quantities and the loss. We find that the dominant directions of the gradient extracted by singular value decomposition become increasingly aligned with the dominant $Q$ vectors as training proceeds. Furthermore, we show that the task outcome of an RNN is maximally affected by input perturbations at moments where high state space expansion is taking place (as measured by FTLEs). Our results showcase deep links between computations, loss gradients, and dynamical systems stability theory for RNNs. This opens the way to design adaptive methods that take into account state-space dynamics to improve computations.
\end{abstract}

\section{1 INTRODUCTION  }


Sequential inputs comes in a wide variety of forms, from natural speech or text, to electrical signals in the brain, financial markers, audio input and music, and more broadly, multivariate time series data (Pang et al., 2019; Mikolov et al., 2010; Das & Olurotimi, 1998; Tino et al., 2001; Su et al., 2020). Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) specialize in processing such data by iteratively updating their hidden states $h_{t+1}$ based on previous states $h_{t}$ modulated by recurrent connectivity weights, and input $x_{t}$ via input weights. The compounding effect of signal amplification and dampening across many RNN iterations can lead to high sensitivity in some $h_{t}$ directions and very little in others, making training RNN over long sequential inputs challenging (Bengio et al., 1994). RNN form non-autonomous dynamical systems and thus, the evolution of the hidden states and memory of RNNs can be understood through the lens of dynamical systems theory and analysis. While RNN have been extensively studied, the relationship between state space dynamics — especially localized sensitivity to perturbations — and task performance remains relatively misunderstood. In this work, we explore this link and reveal new properties of RNN state space flows that inform, and can help guide, computations.  

An important method for characterization of dynamical systems is Lyapunov Exponents $(L E)$ (Ruelle, 1979; Oseledets, 2008) which measure the average separation/contraction rates of infinitesimally close trajectories. Recent work identifying RNN as dynamical systems has extended LE calculation and analysis to these systems (Engelken et al., 2020). Specifically of interest is the relation between Lyapunov exponent spectra and RNN performance as measured by network post-training accuracy, either by calculating the correlation between direct LE statistics and loss (Vogt et al., 2022a), or by training networks to capture a latent representation which separates networks according to accuracy (Vogt et al., 2022b). A limitation of this approach takes root in the fact that LEs are defined as asymptotic quantities, averaged as time approaches infinity and therefore, only capture averaged effects of space expansion and contraction. As a result, some more localized phenomena that may influence specific computations on particular input features are missed.  

Here, we build on these previous works and derive connections between the gradient of the recurrent weight matrix and the finite-time intermediate values involved in LE computations over the course of a sequence. To do so, we leverage Finite Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE), quantities that have been initially derived to characterize fluid flows and the formation of Lagrangian Coherent Structures (Shadden et al., 2005; Haller, 2015; GREEN et al., 2007), time-dependent regions of state space that show high sensitivity to perturbations and act as dynamic separatrices. These methods are especially relevant in light of a recent resurgence in RNN-like methods to model long-term temporal structure called State Space Models, which have been demonstrated to exceed the capability of transformers while performing faster generation (Gu et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022a;b; Smith et al., 2023). Ongoing work translates these advances to new RNN structures which exhibit similarly impressive performance for very long sequences (Orvieto et al., 2023). Moreover, RNNs are often used to model neural circuits in neuroscience systems (Kaushik et al., 2022), for which measuring temporal and spatial patterns of activity simultaneously is necessary to fully understand modes of behavior (Barak, 2017). The lessons drawn from our work contribute to computational neuroscience by linking localized dynamic stability to task outcome.  

Our contribution can be outlined as follows. We derive a novel expression of loss gradients in RNNs explicitly in terms of the components extracted in FTLE calculations, and we explore the evolution of both the FTLEs and their associated vectors to analyze their correlation and influence on performance and confidence on classification tasks. We demonstrate that the vectors associated with the maximal FTLEs of an RNN become further aligned over the course of an input sequence with the dominant modes of the gradient matrix as defined by the singular vectors. As a consequence of this, we show that the step-wise expansion and contraction of FTLE subspaces during Jacobian QR decomposition steps involved in LE computations can serve as indicators of input sensitivity. We show that selection of moments of high state space expansion are indicative of instabilities such that subtle input perturbations impact network output in significant adversarial ways. Through this work, we can develop a deeper understanding of information and gradient propagation in recurrent systems.  



\section{2 BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION  }




\section{3 GRADIENT MATRIX REPRESENTATION AND LINK TO FTLES  }


In previous sections, we described how FTLEs are computed. We present our derivation linking the components of FTLEs to RNN loss gradients, and ultimately to the loss.  



\section{4 EXPERIMENTS  }


In the previous section, we derived quantities that show the FTLEs and loss gradients are related in fundamental ways. We now set out to verify and exploit these links to show that state space dynamics have an impact on computations. Namely, we aim to show that the $Q$ vectors indicate the geometry of the gradient, aligning with the dominant modes of $\Delta\mathbf{V}$ , and that the $R$ values represent the temporal contributions to the loss gradient, indicating the network’s input sensitivity.  

For our experiments, we consider a vanilla RNN (equation 5) trained on the sequential MNIST task. For such a task, the MNIST dataset of handwritten numbers is fed to the RNN the image as a sequence of one or more pixels at a time, and the RNN must predict the number that was written at the end. In its standard form, the MNIST dataset images are $28\times28$ pixels, for a total of 784 pixels. We consider two different setups for this task.  

1) Analysis of $\Delta\mathbf{V}$ and the geometric alignment with $Q$ vectors: We compute the cosine similarity (alignment) between singular vectors of $\Delta\mathbf{V}$ and the $Q$ vectors and demonstrate the evolution of this alignment over the course of training and sequence index as the confidence of the network’s predictions increases. We consider a smaller network (128 hidden units) trained on shorter sequences, given the significant computational cost of calculating the gradient at each step. For this experiment, we consider the row-wise SMNIST task (Deng, 2012), in which the network receives a full row of the image (28 pixels). Since there are 28 rows in each image, the sequence length for this setup is 28.  

2) Analysis of $R$ values and input sensitivity: We identify input locations to perturb based on times at which the greatest degree of expansion in state space occurs. We demonstrate the impact these perturbations have on network output is greater than that of perturbations at randomly-selected input locations. We use a larger RNN (512 units) trained on MNIST dataset with permuted pixel-wise input, giving an input length of 784. This size of network is necessary to achieve good performance on sequences of this length. Furthermore, by reducing the dimension of the input, we are able to isolate the individual input pixels which correspond to the $R$ values at that point in the sequence.  



